THERE WAS ONCE a town in the heart of America where
all life seemed to live in harmony with its surroundings. e town
lay in the midst of a checkerboard of prosperous farms, with fields
of grain and hillsides of orchards where, in spring, white clouds of
bloom drifted above the green fields. In autumn, oak and maple
and birch set up a blaze of color that flamed and flickered across
a backdrop of pines. en foxes barked in the hills and deer
silently crossed the fields, half hidden in the mists of the fall
mornings.
Along the roads, laurel, viburnum and alder, great ferns and
wildflowers delighted the travelers eye through much of the year.
Even in winter the roadsides were places of beauty, where
countless birds came to feed on the berries and on the seed heads
of the dried weeds rising above the snow. e countryside was, in
fact, famous for the abundance and variety of its bird life, and
when the flood of migrants was pouring through in spring and fall
people traveled from great distances to observe them. Others
came to fish the streams, which flowed clear and cold out of the
hills and contained shady pools where trout lay. So it had been
from the days many years ago when the first settlers raised their
houses, sank their wells, and built their barns.
en a strange blight crept over the area and everything
began to change. Some evil spell had settled on the community:
mysterious maladies swept the flocks of chickens; the cattle and
sheep sickened and died. Everywhere was a shadow of death. e
farmers spoke of much illness among their families. In the town
the doctors had become more and more puzzled by new kinds of
sickness appearing among their patients. ere had been several
sudden and unexplained deaths, not only among adults but even
among children, who would be stricken suddenly while at play
and die within a few hours.
ere was a strange stillness. e birds, for examplewhere
had they gone? Many people spoke of them, puzzled and
disturbed. e feeding stations in the backyards were deserted.
e few birds seen anywhere were moribund; they trembled
violently and could not fly. It was a spring without voices. On the
mornings that had once throbbed with the dawn chorus of robins,
catbirds, doves, jays, wrens, and scores of other bird voices there
was now no sound; only silence lay over the fields and woods and
marsh.
On the farms the hens brooded, but no chicks hatched. e
farmers complained that they were unable to raise any pigsthe
litters were small and the young survived only a few days. e
apple trees were coming into bloom but no bees droned among
the blossoms, so there was no pollination and there would be no
fruit.
e roadsides, once so attractive, were now lined with
browned and withered vegetation as though swept by fire. ese,
too, were silent, deserted by all living things. Even the streams
were now lifeless. Anglers no longer visited them, for all the fish had died.
In the gutters under the eaves and between the shingles of the
roofs, a white granular powder still showed a few patches; some
weeks before it had fallen like snow upon the roofs and the lawns,
the fields and streams.
No witchcraft, no enemy action had silenced the rebirth of
new life in this stricken world. e people had done it themselves.
is town does not actually exist, but it might easily have a
thousand counterparts in America or elsewhere in the world. I
know of no community that has experienced all the misfortunes I
describe. Yet every one of these disasters has actually happened
somewhere, and many real communities have already suffered a
substantial number of them. A grim specter has crept upon us
almost unnoticed, and this imagined tragedy may easily become
a stark reality we all shall know.
What has already silenced the voices of spring in countless
towns in America? is book is an attempt to explain.
