FROM SMALL BEGINNINGS over farmlands and forests the
scope of aerial spraying has widened and its volume has increased
so that it has become what a British ecologist recently called an
amazing rain of death upon the surface of the earth. Our attitude
toward poisons has undergone a subtle change. Once they were
kept in containers marked with skull and crossbones; the
infrequent occasions of their use were marked with utmost care
that they should come in contact with the target and with nothing
else. With the development of the new organic insecticides and
the abundance of surplus planes after the Second World War, all
this was forgotten. Although todays poisons are more dangerous
than any known before, they have amazingly become something
to be showered down indiscriminately from the skies. Not only
the target insect or plant, but anythinghuman or nonhuman
within range of the chemical fallout may know the sinister touch
of the poison. Not only forests and cultivated fields are sprayed,
but towns and cities as well.
A good many people now have misgivings about the aerial
distribution of lethal chemicals over millions of acres, and two
mass-spraying campaigns undertaken in the late s have done
much to increase these doubts. ese were the campaigns against
the gypsy moth in the northeastern states and the fire ant in the
South. Neither is a native insect but both have been in this
country for many years without creating a situation calling for
desperate measures. Yet drastic action was suddenly taken against
them, under the end-justifies-the-means philosophy that has too
long directed the control divisions of our Department of
Agriculture.
e gypsy moth program shows what a vast amount of
damage can be done when reckless large-scale treatment is
substituted for local and moderate control. e campaign against
the fire ant is a prime example of a campaign based on gross
exaggeration of the need for control, blunderingly launched
without scientific knowledge of the dosage of poison required to
destroy the target or of its effects on other life. Neither program
has achieved its goal.
e gypsy moth, a native of Europe, has been in the United
States for nearly a hundred years. In  a French scientist,
Leopold Trouvelot, accidentally allowed a few of these moths to
escape from his laboratory in Medford, Massachusetts, where he
was attempting to cross them with silkworms. Little by little the
gypsy moth has spread throughout New England. e primary
agent of its progressive spread is the wind; the larval, or
caterpillar, stage is extremely light and can be carried to con
siderable heights and over great distances. Another means is the
shipment of plants carrying the egg masses, the form in which the
species exists over winter. e gypsy moth, which in its larval
stage attacks the foliage of oak trees and a few other hardwoods
for a few weeks each spring, now occurs in all the New England
states. It also occurs sporadically in New Jersey, where it was
introduced in  on a shipment of spruce trees from Holland,
and in Michigan, where its method of entry is not known. e
New England hurricane of  carried it into Pennsylvania and
New York, but the Adirondacks have generally served as a barrier
to its westward advance, being forested with species not attractive to it.
e task of confining the gypsy moth to the northeastern
corner of the country has been accomplished by a variety of
methods, and in the nearly one hundred years since its arrival on
this continent the fear that it would invade the great hardwood
forests of the southern Appalachians has not been justified.
irteen parasites and predators were imported from abroad and
successfully established in New England. e Agriculture
Department itself has credited these importations with
appreciably reducing the frequency and destructiveness of gypsy
moth outbreaks. is natural control, plus quarantine measures
and local spraying, achieved what the Department in
described as outstanding restriction of distribution and damage.
Yet only a year after expressing satisfaction with the state of
affairs, its Plant Pest Control Division embarked on a program
calling for the blanket spraying of several million acres a year with
the announced intention of eventually eradicating the gypsy
moth. (Eradication means the complete and final extinction or
extermination of a species throughout its range. Yet as successive
programs have failed, the Department has found it necessary to
speak of second or third eradications of the same species in the
same area.)
e Departments all-out chemical war on the gypsy moth
began on an ambitious scale. In  nearly a million acres were
sprayed in the states of Pennsylvania, New Jersey, Michigan, and
New York. Many complaints of damage were made by people in
the sprayed areas. Conservationists became increasingly
disturbed as the pattern of spraying huge areas began to establish
itself. When plans were announced for spraying  million acres in
opposition became even stronger. State and federal
agriculture officials characteristically shrugged off individual
complaints as unimportant.
e Long Island area included within the gypsy moth spraying
in  consisted chiefly of heavily populated towns and suburbs
and of some coastal areas with bordering salt marsh. Nassau
County, Long Island, is the most densely settled county in New
York apart from New York City itself. In what seems the height of
absurdity, the threat of infestation of the New York City
metropolitan area has been cited as an important justification of
the program. e gypsy moth is a forest insect, certainly not an
inhabitant of cities. Nor does it live in meadows, cultivated fields,
gardens, or marshes. Nevertheless, the planes hired by the United
States Department of Agriculture and the New York Department
of Agriculture and Markets in  showered down the
prescribed DDT-in-fuel-oil with impartiality. ey sprayed truck
gardens and dairy farms, fish ponds and salt marshes. ey
sprayed the quarter-acre lots of suburbia, drenching a housewife
making a desperate effort to cover her garden before the roaring
plane reached her, and showering insecticide over children at play
and commuters at railway stations. At Setauket a fine quarter
horse drank from a trough in a field which the planes had sprayed;
ten hours later it was dead. Automobiles were spotted with the
oily mixture; flowers and shrubs were ruined. Birds, fish, crabs,
and useful insects were killed.
A group of Long Island citizens led by the world-famous
ornithologist Robert Cushman Murphy had sought a court
injunction to prevent the  spraying. Denied a preliminary
injunction, the protesting citizens had to suffer the prescribed
drenching with DDT, but thereafter persisted in efforts to obtain
a permanent injunction. But because the act had already been
performed the courts held that the petition for an injunction was
moot. e case was carried all the way to the Supreme Court,
which declined to hear it. Justice William O. Douglas, strongly
dissenting from the decision not to review the case, held that the
alarms that many experts and responsible officials have raised
about the perils of DDT underline the public importance of this
case.
e suit brought by the Long Island citizens at least served to
focus public attention on the growing trend to mass application
of insecticides, and on the power and inclination of the control
agencies to disregard supposedly inviolate property rights of
private citizens.
e contamination of milk and of farm produce in the course
of the gypsy moth spraying came as an unpleasant surprise to
many people. What happened on the -acre Waller farm in
northern Westchester County, New York, was revealing. Mrs.
Waller had specifically requested Agriculture officials not to spray
her property, because it would be impossible to avoid the pastures
in spraying the woodlands. She offered to have the land checked
for gypsy moths and to have any infestation destroyed by spot
spraying. Although she was assured that no farms would be
sprayed, her property received two direct sprayings and, in
addition, was twice subjected to drifting spray. Milk samples
taken from the Wallers purebred Guernsey cows  hours later
contained DDT in the amount of  parts per million. Forage
samples from fields where the cows had grazed were of course
contaminated also. Although the county Health Department was
notified, no instructions were given that the milk should not be
marketed. is situation is unfortunately typical of the lack of
consumer protection that is all too common. Although the Food
and Drug Administration permits no residues of pesticides in
milk, its restrictions are not only inadequately policed but they
apply solely to interstate shipments. State and county officials are under no compulsion to follow the federal pesticides tolerances
unless local laws happen to conformand they seldom do.
Truck gardeners also suffered. Some leaf crops were so
burned and spotted as to be unmarketable. Others carried heavy
residues; a sample of peas analyzed at Cornell Universitys
Agricultural Experiment Station contained  to  parts per
million of DDT e legal maximum is  parts per million.
Growers therefore had to sustain heavy losses or find themselves
in the position of selling produce carrying illegal residues. Some
of them sought and collected damages.
As the aerial spraying of DDT increased, so did the number of
suits filed in the courts. Among them were suits brought by
beekeepers in several areas of New York State. Even before the
spraying, the beekeepers had suffered heavily from use of
DDT in orchards. Up to  I had regarded as gospel everything
that emanated from the U.S. Department of Agriculture and the
agricultural colleges, one of them remarked bitterly. But in May
of that year this man lost  colonies after the state had sprayed
a large area. So widespread and heavy was the loss that  other
beekeepers joined him in suing the state for a quarter of a million
dollars in damages. Another beekeeper, whose  colonies were
incidental targets of the  spray, reported that  per cent of
the field force of bees (the workers out gathering nectar and
pollen for the hives) had been killed in forested areas and up to
per cent in farming areas sprayed less intensively. It is a very
distressful thing, he wrote, to walk into a yard in May and not
hear a bee buzz.
e gypsy moth programs were marked by many acts of
irresponsibility. Because the spray planes were paid by the gallon
rather than by the acre there was no effort to be conservative, and
many properties were sprayed not once but several times.
Contracts for aerial spraying were in at least one case awarded to
an out-of-state firm with no local address, which had not
complied with the legal requirement of registering with state
officials for the purpose of establishing legal responsibility. In this
exceedingly slippery situation, citizens who suffered direct
financial loss from damage to apple orchards or bees discovered
that there was no one to sue.
After the disastrous  spraying the program was abruptly
and drastically curtailed, with vague statements about
evaluating previous work and testing alternative insecticides.
Instead of the / million acres sprayed in , the treated areas
fell to / million in  and to about , acres in ,
, and . During this interval, the control agencies must
have found news from Long Island disquieting. e gypsy moth
had reappeared there in numbers. e expensive spraying
operation that had cost the Department dearly in public
confidence and good willthe operation that was intended to
wipe out the gypsy moth for everhad in reality accomplished
nothing at all.
Meanwhile, the Departments Plant Pest Control men had
temporarily forgotten gypsy moths, for they had been busy
launching an even more ambitious program in the South. e
word eradication still came easily from the Departments
mimeograph machines; this time the press releases were
promising the eradication of the fire ant.
e fire ant, an insect named for its fiery sting, seems to have
entered the United States from South America by way of the port
of Mobile, Alabama, where it was discovered shortly after the end
of the First World War. By  it had spread into the suburbs of
Mobile and thereafter continued an invasion that has now carried
it into most of the southern states.
During most of the forty-odd years since its arrival in the
United States the fire ant seems to have attracted little attention.
e states where it was most abundant considered it a nuisance,
chiefly because it builds large nests or mounds a foot or more
high. ese may hamper the operation of farm machinery. But
only two states listed it among their  most important insect
pests, and these placed it near the bottom of the list. No official or
private concern seems to have been felt about the fire ant as a
menace to crops or livestock.
With the development of chemicals of broad lethal powers,
there came a sudden change in the official attitude toward the fire
ant. In  the United States Department of Agriculture
launched one of the most remarkable publicity campaigns in its
history. e fire ant suddenly became the target of a barrage of
government releases, motion pictures, and government-inspired
stories portraying it as a despoiler of southern agriculture and a
killer of birds, livestock, and man. A mighty campaign was
announced, in which the federal government in cooperation with
the afflicted states would ultimately treat some ,, acres
in nine southern states.
United States pesticide makers appear to have tapped a sales
bonanza in the increasing numbers of broad-scale pest
elimination programs conducted by the U.S. Department of
Agriculture, cheerfully reported one trade journal in , as the
fire ant program got under way.
Never has any pesticide program been so thoroughly and
deservedly damned by practically everyone except the
beneficiaries of this sales bonanza. It is an outstanding example
of an ill-conceived, badly executed, and thoroughly detrimental
experiment in the mass control of insects, an experiment so
expensive in dollars, in destruction of animal life, and in loss of
public confidence in the Agriculture Department that it is
incomprehensible that any funds should still be devoted to it.
Congressional support of the project was initially won by
representations that were later discredited. e fire ant was
pictured as a serious threat to southern agriculture through
destruction of crops and to wildlife because of attacks on the
young of ground-nesting birds. Its sting was said to make it a
serious menace to human health.
Just how sound were these claims? e statements made by
Department witnesses seeking appropriations were not in accord
with those contained in key publications of the Agriculture
Department. e  bulletin Insecticide Recommendations
for the Control of Insects Attacking Crops and Livestock did not so
much as mention the fire antan extraordinary omission if the
Department believes its own propaganda. Moreover, its
encyclopedic Yearbook for , which was devoted to insects,
contained only one short paragraph on the fire ant out of its half-
million words of text.
Against the Departments undocumented claim that the fire
ant destroys crops and attacks livestock is the careful study of the
Agricultural Experiment Station in the state that has had the most
intimate experience with this insect, Alabama. According to
Alabama scientists, damage to plants in general is rare. Dr. F. S.
Arant, an entomologist at the Alabama Polytechnic Institute and
in  president of the Entomological Society of America, states
that his department has not received a single report of damage
to plants by ants in the past five years  No damage to livestock
has been observed. ese men, who have actually observed the
ants in the field and in the laboratory, say that the fire ants feed
chiefly on a variety of other insects, many of them considered
harmful to mans interests. Fire ants have been observed picking
larvae of the boll weevil off cotton. eir mound-building
activities serve a useful purpose in aerating and draining the soil.
e Alabama studies have been substantiated by investigations at
the Mississippi State University, and are far more impressive than
the Agriculture Departments evidence, apparently based either
on conversations with farmers, who may easily mistake one ant
for another, or on old research. Some entomologists believe that
the ants food habits have changed as it has become more
abundant, so that observations made several decades ago have
little value now.
e claim that the ant is a menace to health and life also bears
considerable modification. e Agriculture Department
sponsored a propaganda movie (to gain support for its program)
in which horror scenes were built around the fire ants sting.
Admittedly this is painful and one is well advised to avoid being
stung, just as one ordinarily avoids the sting of wasp or bee. Severe
reactions may occasionally occur in sensitive individuals, and
medical literature records one death possibly, though not
definitely, attributable to fire ant venom. In contrast to this, the
Office of Vital Statistics records  deaths in  alone from the
sting of bees and wasps. Yet no one seems to have proposed
eradicating these insects. Again, local evidence is most
convincing. Although the fire ant has inhabited Alabama for
years and is most heavily concentrated there, the Alabama State
Health Officer declares that there has never been recorded in
Alabama a human death resulting from the bites of imported fire
ants, and considers the medical cases resulting from the bites of
fire ants incidental. Ant mounds on lawns or playgrounds may
create a situation where children are likely to be stung, but this is
hardly an excuse for drenching millions of acres with poisons.
ese situations can easily be handled by individual treatment of
the mounds.
Damage to game birds was also alleged, without supporting
evidence. Certainly a man well qualified to speak on this issue is
the leader of the Wildlife Research Unit at Auburn, Alabama, Dr.
Maurice F. Baker, who has had many years experience in the area.
But Dr. Bakers opinion is directly opposite to the claims of the
Agriculture Department. He declares: In south Alabama and
northwest Florida we are able to have excellent hunting and
bobwhite populations coexistent with heavy popu lations of the
imported fire ant  in the almost  years that south Alabama
has had the fire ant, game populations have shown a steady and
very substantial increase. Certainly, if the imported fire ant were
a serious menace to wildlife, these conditions could not exist.
What would happen to wildlife as a result of the insecticide
used against the ants was another matter. e chemicals to be
used were dieldrin and heptachlor, both relatively new. ere was
little experience of field use for either, and no one knew what their
effects would be on wild birds, fishes, or mammals when applied
on a massive scale. It was known, however, that both poisons were
many times more toxic than DDT, which had been used by that
time for approximately a decade, and had killed some birds and
many fish even at a rate of  pound per acre. And the dosage of
dieldrin and heptachlor was heavier pounds to the acre under
most conditions, or  pounds of dieldrin if the white-fringed
beetle was also to be controlled. In terms of their effects on birds,
the prescribed use of heptachlor would be equivalent to
pounds of DDT to the acre, that of dieldrin to  pounds!
Urgent protests were made by most of the state conservation
departments, by national conservation agencies, and by ecologists
and even by some entomologists, calling upon the then Secretary
of Agriculture, Ezra Benson, to delay the program at least until
some research had been done to determine the effects of
heptachlor and dieldrin on wild and domestic animals and to find
the minimum amount that would control the ants. e protests
were ignored and the program was launched in . A million
acres were treated the first year. It was clear that any research
would be in the nature of a post mortem.
As the program continued, facts began to accumulate from
studies made by biologists of state and federal wildlife agencies
and several universities. e studies revealed losses running all
the way up to complete destruction of wildlife on some of the
treated areas. Poultry, livestock, and pets were also killed. e
Agriculture Department brushed away all evidence of damage as
exaggerated and misleading.
e facts, however, continue to accumulate. In Hardin
County, Texas, for example, opossums, armadillos, and an
abundant raccoon population virtually disappeared after the
chemical was laid down. Even the second autumn after treatment
these animals were scarce. e few raccoons then found in the
area carried residues of the chemical in their tissues.
Dead birds found in the treated areas had absorbed or
swallowed the poisons used against the fire ants, a fact clearly
shown by chemical analysis of their tissues. (e only bird
surviving in any numbers was the house sparrow, which in other
areas too has given some evidence that it may be relatively
immune.) On a tract in Alabama treated in  half of the birds
were killed. Species that live on the ground or frequent low
vegetation suffered  per cent mortality. Even a year after
treatment, a spring die-off of songbirds occurred and much good
nesting territory lay silent and unoccupied. In Texas, dead
blackbirds, dickcissels, and meadowlarks were found at the nests,
and many nests were deserted. When specimens of dead birds
from Texas, Louisiana, Alabama, Georgia, and Florida were sent
to the Fish and Wildlife Service for analysis, more than  per cent
were found to contain residues of dieldrin or a form of heptachlor,
in amounts up to  parts per million.
Woodcocks, which winter in Louisiana but breed in the
North, now carry the taint of the fire ant poisons in their bodies.
e source of this contamination is clear. Woodcocks feed heavily
on earthworms, which they probe for with their long bills.
Surviving worms in Louisiana were found to have as much as
parts per million of heptachlor in their tissues  to  months
after treatment of the area. A year later they had up to  parts
per million. e consequences of the sublethal poisoning of the
woodcock are now seen in a marked decline in the proportion of
young birds to adults, first observed in the season after fire ant
treatments began.
Some of the most upsetting news for southern sportsmen
concerned the bobwhite quail. is bird, a ground nester and
forager, was all but eliminated on treated areas. In Alabama, for
example, biologists of the Alabama Cooperative Wildlife
Research Unit conducted a preliminary census of the quail
population in a -acre area that was scheduled for treatment.
irteen resident coveys quailranged over the area. Two
weeks after treatment only dead quail could be found. All
specimens sent to the Fish and Wildlife Service for analysis were
found to contain insecticides in amounts sufficient to cause their
death. e Alabama findings were duplicated in Texas, where a
-acre area treated with heptachlor lost all of its quail. Along
with the quail went  per cent of the songbirds. Again, analysis
revealed the presence of heptachlor in the tissues of dead birds.
In addition to quail, wild turkeys were seriously reduced by
the fire ant program. Although  turkeys had been counted on
an area in Wilcox County, Alabama, before heptachlor was
applied, none could be found the summer after treatmentnone,
that is, except a clutch of unhatched eggs and one dead poult. e
wild turkeys may have suffered the same fate as their domestic
brethren, for turkeys on farms in the area treated with chemicals
also produced few young. Few eggs hatched and almost no young
survived. is did not happen on nearby untreated areas.
e fate of the turkeys was by no means unique. One of the
most widely known and respected wildlife biologists in the
country, Dr. Clarence Cottam, called on some of the farmers
whose property had been treated. Besides remarking that all the
little tree birds seemed to have disappeared after the land had
been treated, most of these people reported losses of livestock,
poultry, and household pets. One man was irate against the
control workers, Dr. Cottam reported, as he said he buried or
otherwise disposed of  carcasses of his cows that had been killed
by the poison and he knew of three or four additional cows that
died as a result of the same treatment. Calves died that had been
given only milk since birth.
e people Dr. Cottam interviewed were puzzled by what had
happened in the months following the treatment of their land.
One woman told him she had set several hens after the
surrounding land had been covered with poison, and for reasons
she did not understand very few young were hatched or survived.
Another farmer raises hogs and for fully nine months after the
broadcast of poisons, he could raise no young pigs. e litters
were born dead or they died after birth. A similar report came
from another, who said that out of  litters that might have
numbered as many as  young, only  little pigs survived. is
man had also been quite unable to raise chickens since the land
was poisoned.
e Department of Agriculture has consistently denied
livestock losses related to the fire ant program. However, a
veterinarian in Bainbridge, Georgia, Dr. Otis L. Poitevint, who
was called upon to treat many of the affected animals, has
summarized his reasons for attributing the deaths to the
insecticide as follows. Within a period of two weeks to several
months after the fire ant poison was applied, cattle, goats, horses,
chickens, and birds and other wildlife began to suffer an often
fatal disease of the nervous system. It affected only animals that
had access to contaminated food or water. Stabled animals were
not affected. e condition was seen only in areas treated for fire
ants. Laboratory tests for disease were negative. e symptoms
observed by Dr. Poitevint and other veterinarians were those
described in authoritative texts as indicating poisoning by
dieldrin or heptachlor.
Dr. Poitevint also described an interesting case of a two-
month-old calf that showed symptoms of poisoning by hepta
chlor. e animal was subjected to exhaustive laboratory tests.
e only significant finding was the discovery of  pans per
million of heptachlor in its fat. But it was five months since the
poison had been applied. Did the calf get it directly from grazing
or indirectly from its mothers milk or even before birth? If from
the milk, asked Dr. Poitevint, why were not special precautions
taken to protect our children who drank milk from local dairies?
Dr. Poitevints report brings up a significant problem about
the contamination of milk. e area included in the fire ant
program is predominantly fields and croplands. What about the
dairy cattle that graze on these lands? In treated fields the grasses
will inevitably carry residues of heptachlor in one of its forms, and
if the residues are eaten by the cows the poison will appear in the milk. is direct transmission into milk had been demonstrated
experimentally for heptachlor in , long before the control
program was undetaken, and was later re-potted for dieldrin, also
used in the fire ant program.
e Department of Agricultures annual publications now list
heptachlor and dieldrin among the chemicals that make forage
plants unsuitable for feeding to dairy animals or animals being
finished for slaughter, yet the control divisions of the Department
promote programs that spread heptachlor and dieldrin over
substantial areas of grazing land in the South. Who is
safeguarding the consumer to see that no residues of dieldrin or
heptachlor are appearing in milk? e United States Department
of Agriculture would doubtless answer that it has advised farmers
to keep milk cows out of treated pastures for  to  days. Given
the small size of many of the farms and the large-scale nature of
the programmuch of the chemical applied by planesit is
extremely doubtful that this recommendation was followed or
could be. Nor is the prescribed period adequate in view of the
persistent nature of the residues.
e Food and Drug Administration, although frowning on the
presence of any pesticide residues in milk, has little authority in
this situation. In most of the states included in the fire ant
program the dairy industry is small and its products do not cross
state lines. Protection of the milk supply endangered by a federal
program is therefore left to the states themselves. Inquiries
addressed to the health officers or other appropriate officials of
Alabama, Louisiana, and Texas in  revealed that no tests had
been made and that it simply was not known whether the milk
was contaminated with pesticides or not.
Meanwhile, after rather than before the control program was
launched, some research into the peculiar nature of heptachlor
was done. Perhaps it would be more accurate to say that someone
looked up the research already published, since the basic fact that
brought about belated action by the federal government had been
discovered several years before, and should have influenced the
initial handling of the program. is is the fact that heptachlor,
after a short period in the tissues of animals or plants or in the
soil, assumes a considerably more toxic form known as
heptachlor epoxide. e epoxide is popularly described as an
oxidation product produced by weathering. e fact that this
transformation could occur had been known since , when the
Food and Drug Administration discovered that female rats, fed
parts per million of heptachlor, had stored  parts per million
of the more poisonous epoxide only  weeks later.
ese facts were allowed to come out of the obscurity of
biological literature in , when the Food and Drug
Administration took action which had the effect of banning any
residues of heptachlor or its epoxide on food. is ruling put at
least a temporary damper on the program; although the
Agriculture Department continued to press for its annual
appropriations for fire ant control, local agricultural agents
became increasingly reluctant to advise farmers to use chemicals
which would probably result in their crops being legally
unmarketable.
In short, the Department of Agriculture embarked on its
program without even elementary investigation of what was
already known about the chemical to be usedor if it
investigated, it ignored the findings. It must also have failed to do
preliminary research to discover the minimum amount of the
chemical that would accomplish its purpose. After three years of
heavy dosages, it abruptly reduced the rate of application of
heptachlor from  pounds to / pounds per acre in ; later
on to / pound per acre, applied in two treatments of / pound
each,  to  months apart. An official of the Department explained
that an aggressive methods improvement program showed the
lower rate to be effective. Had this information been acquired
before the program was launched, a vast amount of damage could
have been avoided and the taxpayers could have been saved a
great deal of money.
In , perhaps in an attempt to offset the growing
dissatisfaction with the program, the Agriculture Department
offered the chemicals free to Texas landowners who would sign a
release absolving federal, state, and local governments of
responsibility for damage. In the same year the State of Alabama,
alarmed and angry at the damage done by the chemicals, refused
to appropriate any further funds for the project. One of its officials
characterized the whole program as ill advised, hastily
conceived, poorly planned, and a glaring example of riding
roughshod over the responsibilities of other public and private
agencies. Despite the lack of state funds, federal money
continued to trickle into Alabama, and in  the legislature was
again persuaded to make a small appropriation. Meanwhile,
farmers in Louisiana showed growing reluctance to sign up for
the project as it became evident that use of chemicals against the
fire ant was causing an upsurge of insects destructive to
sugarcane. Moreover, the program was obviously accomplishing
nothing. Its dismal state was tersely summarized in the spring of
by the director of entomology research at Louisiana State
University Agricultural Experiment Station, Dr. L. D. Newsom:
e imported fire ant eradication program which has been
conducted by state and federal agencies is thus far a failure. ere
are more infested acres in Louisiana now than when the program
began.
A swing to more sane and conservative methods seems to
have begun. Florida, reporting that there are more fire ants in
Florida now than there were when the program started,
announced it was abandoning any idea of a broad eradication
program and would instead concentrate on local control.
Effective and inexpensive methods of local control have been
known for years. e mound-building habit of the fire ant makes
the chemical treatment of individual mounds a simple matter.
Cost of such treatment is about one dollar per acre. For situations
where mounds are numerous and mechanized methods are
desirable, a cultivator which first levels and then applies chemical
directly to the mounds has been developed by Mississippis
Agricultural Experiment Station. e method gives  to  per
cent control of the ants. Its cost is only . per acre. e
Agriculture Departments mass control program, on the other
hand, cost about . per acrethe most expensive, the most
damaging, and the least effective program of all.
