THE CONTAMINATION of our world is not alone a matter of
mass spraying. Indeed, for most of us this is of less importance
than the innumerable small-scale exposures to which we are
subjected day by day, year after year. Like the constant dripping
of water that in turn wears away the hardest stone, this birth-to-
death contact with dangerous chemicals may in the end prove
disastrous. Each of these recurrent exposures, no matter how
slight, contributes to the progressive buildup of chemicals in our
bodies and so to cumulative poisoning. Probably no person is
immune to contact with this spreading contamination unless he
lives in the most isolated situation imaginable. Lulled by the soft
sell and the hidden persuader, the average citizen is seldom aware
of the deadly materials with which he is surrounding himself;
indeed, he may not realize he is using them at all.
So thoroughly has the age of poisons become established that
anyone may walk into a store and, without questions being asked,
buy substances of far greater death-dealing power than the
medicinal drug for which he may be required to sign a poison
book in the pharmacy next door. A few minutes research in any
supermarket is enough to alarm the most stouthearted
customerprovided, that is, he has even a rudimentary
knowledge of the chemicals presented for his choice.
If a huge skull and crossbones were suspended above the
insecticide department the customer might at least enter it with
the respect normally accorded death-dealing materials. But
instead the display is homey and cheerful, and, with the pickles
and olives across the aisle and the bath and laundry soaps
adjoining, the rows upon rows of insecticides are displayed.
Within easy reach of a childs exploring hand are chemicals in
glass containers. If dropped to the floor by a child or careless adult
everyone nearby could be splashed with the same chemical that
has sent spraymen using it into convulsions. ese hazards of
course follow the purchaser right into his home. A can of a
mothproofing material containing DDD, for example, carries in
very fine print the warning that its contents are under pressure
and that it may burst if exposed to heat or open flame. A common
insecticide for household use, including assorted uses in the
kitchen, is chlordane. Yet the Food and Drug Administrations
chief pharmacologist has declared the hazard of living in a house
sprayed with chlordane to be very great. Other household
preparations contain the even more toxic dieldrin.
Use of poisons in the kitchen is made both attractive and easy.
Kitchen shelf paper, white or tinted to match ones color scheme,
may be impregnated with insecticide, not merely on one but on
both sides. Manufacturers offer us do-it-yourself booklets on how
to kill bugs. With push-button ease, one may send a fog of dieldrin
into the most inaccessible nooks and crannies of cabinets,
corners, and baseboards.
If we are troubled by mosquitoes, chiggers, or other insect
pests on our persons we have a choice of innumerable lotions,
creams, and sprays for application to clothing or skin. Although
we are warned that some of these will dissolve varnish, paint, and
synthetic fabrics, we are presumably to infer that the human skin
is impervious to chemicals. To make certain that we shall at all
times be prepared to repel insects, an exclusive New York store
advertises a pocket-sized insecticide dispenser, suitable for the
purse or for beach, golf, or fishing gear.
We can polish our floors with a wax guaranteed to kill any
insect that walks over it. We can hang strips impregnated with the
chemical lindane in our closets and garment bags or place them
in our bureau drawers for a half years freedom from worry over
moth damage. e advertisements contain no suggestion that
lindane is dangerous. Neither do the ads for an electronic device
that dispenses lindane fumeswe are told that it is safe and
odorless. Yet the truth of the matter is that the American Medical
Association considers lindane vaporizers so dangerous that it
conducted an extended campaign against them in its Journal.
e Department of Agriculture, in a Home and Garden
Bulletin, advises us to spray our clothing with oil solutions of
DDT, dieldrin, chlordane, or any of several other moth killers. If
excessive spraying results in a white deposit of insecticide on the
fabric, this may be removed by brushing, the Department says,
omitting to caution us to be careful where and how the brushing
is done. All these matters attended to, we may round out our day
with insecticides by going to sleep under a mothproof blanket
impregnated with dieldrin.
Gardening is now firmly linked with the super poisons. Every
hardware store, garden-supply shop, and supermarket has rows
of insecticides for every conceivable horticultural situation. ose
who fail to make wide use of this array of lethal sprays and dusts
are by implication remiss, for almost every newspapers garden
page and the majority of the gardening magazines take their use
for granted.
So extensively are even the rapidly lethal organic phosphorus
insecticides applied to lawns and ornamental plants that in
the Florida State Board of Health found it necessary to forbid the
commercial use of pesticides in residential areas by anyone who
had not first obtained a permit and met certain requirements. A
number of deaths from parathion had occurred in Florida before
this regulation was adopted.
Little is done, however, to warn the gardener or homeowner
that he is handling extremely dangerous materials. On the
contrary, a constant stream of new gadgets make it easier to use
poisons on lawn and gardenand increase the gardeners contact
with them. One may get a jar-type attachment for the garden
hose, for example, by which such extremely dangerous chemicals
as chlordane or dieldrin are applied as one waters the lawn. Such
a device is not only a hazard to the person using the hose; it is also
a public menace. e New York Times found it necessary to issue
a warning on its garden page to the effect that unless special
protective devices were installed poisons might get into the water
supply by back siphonage. Considering the number of such
devices that are in use, and the scarcity of warnings such as this,
do we need to wonder why our public waters are contaminated?
As an example of what may happen to the gardener himself,
we might look at the case of a physicianan enthusiastic spare-
time gardenerwho began using DDT and then malathion on his
shrubs and lawn, making regular weekly applications. Sometimes
he applied the chemicals with a hand spray, sometimes with an
attachment to his hose. In doing so, his skin and clothing were
often soaked with spray. After about a year of this sort of thing,
he suddenly collapsed and was hospitalized. Examination of a
biopsy specimen of fat showed an accumulation of  pans per
million of DDT. ere was extensive nerve damage, which his
physicians regarded as permanent. As time went on he lost
weight, suffered extreme fatigue, and experienced a peculiar
muscular weakness, a characteristic effect of malathion. All of
these persisting effects were severe enough to make it difficult for
the physician to carry on his practice.
Besides the once innocuous garden hose, power mowers also
have been fitted with devices for the dissemination of pesticides,
attachments that will dispense a cloud of vapor as the homeowner
goes about the task of mowing his lawn. So to the potentially
dangerous fumes from gasoline are added the finely divided
panicles of whatever insecticide the probably unsuspecting
suburbanite has chosen to distribute, raising the level of air
pollution above his own grounds to something few cities could
equal.
Yet little is said about the hazards of the fad of gardening by
poisons, or of insecticides used in the home; warnings on labels
are printed so inconspicuously in small type that few take the
trouble to read or follow them. An industrial firm recently
undertook to find out just how few. Its survey indicated that fewer
than fifteen people out of a hundred of those using insecticide
aerosols and sprays are even aware of the warnings on the
containers.
e mores of suburbia now dictate that crabgrass must go at
whatever cost. Sacks containing chemicals designed to rid the
lawn of such despised vegetation have become almost a status
symbol. ese weed-killing chemicals are sold under brand
names that never suggest their identity or nature. To learn that
they contain chlordane or dieldrin one must read exceedingly fine
print placed on the least conspicuous part of the sack. e
descriptive literature that may be picked up in any hardware-or
garden-supply store seldom if ever reveals the true hazard
involved in handling or applying the material. Instead, the typical
illustration portrays a happy family scene, father and son
smilingly preparing to apply the chemical to the lawn, small
children tumbling over the grass with a dog.
e question of chemical residues on the food we eat is a
hotly debated issue. e existence of such residues is either played
down by the industry as unimportant or is flatly denied.
Simultaneously, there is a strong tendency to brand as fanatics or
cultists all who are so perverse as to demand that their food be
free of insect poisons. In all this cloud of controversy, what are
the actual facts?
It has been medically established that, as common sense
would tell us, persons who lived and died before the dawn of the
DDT era (about ) contained no trace of DDT or any similar
material in their tissues. As mentioned in Chapter , samples of
body fat collected from the general population between  and
averaged from . to . parts per million of DDT. ere is
some evidence that the average level has risen since then to a
consistently higher figure, and individuals with occupational or
other special exposures to insecticides of course store even more.
Among the general population with no known gross
exposures to insecticides it may be assumed that much of the
DDT stored in fat deposits has entered the body in food. To test
this assumption, a scientific team from the United States Public
Health Service sampled restaurant and institutional meals. Every
meal sampled contained DDT. From this the investigators
concluded, reasonably enough, that few if any foods can be relied
upon to be entirely free of DDT.
e quantities in such meals may be enormous. In a separate
Public Health Service study, analysis of prison meals disclosed
such items as stewed dried fruit containing . parts per million
and bread containing . parts per million of DDT!
In the diet of the average home, meats and any products
derived from animal fats contain the heaviest residues of
chlorinated hydrocarbons. is is because these chemicals are
soluble in fat. Residues on fruits and vegetables tend to be
somewhat less. ese are little affected by washingthe only
remedy is to remove and discard all outside leaves of such
vegetables as lettuce or cabbage, to peel fruit and to use no skins
or outer covering whatever. Cooking does not destroy residues.
Milk is one of the few foods in which no pesticide residues are
permitted by Food and Drug Administration regulations. In
actual fact, however, residues turn up whenever a check is made.
ey are heaviest in butter and other manufactured dairy
products. A check of  samples of such products in
showed that a third contained residues, a situation which the
Food and Drug Administration characterized as far from
encouraging.
To find a diet free from DDT and related chemicals, it seems
one must go to a remote and primitive land, still lacking the
amenities of civilization. Such a land appears to exist, at least
marginally, on the far Arctic shores of Alaskaalthough even
there one may see the approaching shadow. When scientists
investigated the native diet of the Eskimos in this region it was
found to be free from insecticides. e fresh and dried fish; the
fat, oil, or meat from beaver, beluga, caribou, moose, oogruk,
polar bear, and walrus; cranberries, salmonberries and wild
rhubarb all had so far escaped contamination. ere was only one
exceptiontwo white owls from Point Hope carried small
amounts of DDT, perhaps acquired in the course of some
migratory journey.
When some of the Eskimos themselves were checked by
analysis of fat samples, small residues of DDT were found (o to
. parts per million). e reason for this was clear. e fat
samples were taken from people who had left their native villages
to enter the United States Public Health Service Hospital in
Anchorage for surgery. ere the ways of civilization prevailed,
and the meals in this hospital were found to contain as much
DDT as those in the most populous city. For their brief stay in
civilization the Eskimos were rewarded with a taint of poison.
e fact that every meal we eat carries its load of chlorinated
hydrocarbons is the inevitable consequence of the almost
universal spraying or dusting of agricultural crops with these
poisons. If the farmer scrupulously follows the instructions on the
labels, his use of agricultural chemicals will produce no residues
larger than are permitted by the Food and Drug Administration.
Leaving aside for the moment the question whether these legal
residues are as safe as they are represented to be, there remains
the well-known fact that farmers very frequently exceed the
prescribed dosages, use the chemical too close to the time of
harvest, use several insecticides where one would do, and in other
ways display the common human failure to read the fine print.
Even the chemical industry recognizes the frequent misuse of
insecticides and the need for education of farmers. One of its
leading trade journals recently declared that many users do not
seem to understand that they may exceed insecticide tolerances if
they use higher dosages than recommended. And haphazard use
of insecticides on many crops may be based on farmers whims.
e files of the Food and Drug Administration contain
records of a disturbing number of such violations. A few examples
will serve to illustrate the disregard of directions: a lettuce farmer who applied not one but eight different insecticides to his crop
within a short time of harvest, a shipper who had used the deadly
parathion on celery in an amount five times the recommended
maximum, growers using endrinmost toxic of all the
chlorinated hydrocarbonson lettuce although no resi due was
allowable, spinach sprayed with DDT a week before harvest.
ere are also cases of chance or accidental contamination.
Large lots of green coffee in burlap bags have become
contaminated while being transported by vessels also carrying a
cargo of insecticides. Packaged foods in warehouses are subjected
to repeated aerosol treatments with DDT, lindane, and other
insecticides, which may penetrate the packaging materials and
occur in measurable quantities on the contained foods. e
longer the food remains in storage, the greater the danger of
contamination.
To the question But doesnt the government protect us from
such things? the answer is, Only to a limited extent. e
activities of the Food and Drug Administration in the field of
consumer protection against pesticides are severely limited by
two facts. e first is that it has jurisdiction only over foods
shipped in interstate commerce; foods grown and marketed
within a state are entirely outside its sphere of authority, no
matter what the violation. e second and critically limiting fact
is the small number of inspectors on its stafffewer than  men
for all its varied work. According to a Food and Drug official, only
an infinitesimal part of the crop products moving in interstate
commercefar less than  per centcan be checked with
existing facilities, and this is not enough to have statistical
significance. As for food produced and sold within a state, the
situation is even worse, for most states have woefully inadequate
laws in this field.
e system by which the Food and Drug Administration
establishes maximum permissible limits of contamination, called
tolerances, has obvious defects. Under the conditions prevailing
it provides mere paper security and promotes a completely
unjustified impression that safe limits have been established and
are being adhered to. As to the safety of allowing a sprinkling of
poisons on our fooda little on this, a little on thatmany people
contend, with highly persuasive reasons, that no poison is safe or
desirable on food. In setting a tolerance level the Food and Drug
Administration reviews tests of the poison on laboratory animals
and then establishes a maximum level of contamination that is
much less than required to produce symptoms in the test animal.
is system, which is supposed to ensure safety, ignores a number
of important facts. A laboratory animal, living under controlled
and highly artificial conditions, consuming a given amount of a
specific chemical, is very different from a human being whose
exposures to pesticides are not only multiple but for the most part
unknown, unmeasurable, and uncontrollable. Even if  parts per
million of DDT on the lettuce in his luncheon salad were safe,
the meal includes other foods, each with allowable residues, and
the pesticides on his food are, as we have seen, only a part, and
possibly a small part, of his total exposure. is piling up of
chemicals from many different sources creates a total exposure
that cannot be measured. It is meaningless, therefore, to talk
about the safety of any specific amount of residue.
And there are other defects. Tolerances have sometimes been
established against the better judgment of Food and Drug
Administration scientists, as in the case cited on page  ff., or
they have been established on the basis of inadequate knowledge
of the chemical concerned. Better information has led to later
reduction or withdrawal of the tolerance, but only after the public
has been exposed to admittedly dangerous levels of the chemical
for months or years. is happened when heptachlor was given a
tolerance that later had to be revoked. For some chemicals no
practical field method of analysis exists before a chemical is
registered for use. Inspectors are therefore frustrated in their
search for residues. is difficulty greatly hampered the work on
the cranberry chemical, aminotriazole. Analytical methods are
lacking, too, for certain fungicides in common use for the
treatment of seedsseeds which if unused at the end of the
planting season, may very well find their way into human food.
In effect, then, to establish tolerances is to authorize
contamination of public food supplies with poisonous chemicals
in order that the farmer and the processor may enjoy the benefit
of cheaper productionthen to penalize the consumer by taxing
him to maintain a policing agency to make certain that he shall
not get a lethal dose. But to do the policing job properly would
cost money beyond any legislators courage to appropriate, given
the present volume and toxicity of agricultural chemicals. So in
the end the luckless consumer pays his taxes but gets his poisons
regardless.
What is the solution? e first necessity is the elimination of
tolerances on the chlorinated hydrocarbons, the organic
phosphorus group, and other highly toxic chemicals. It will
immediately be objected that this will place an intolerable burden
on the farmer. But if, as is now the presumable goal, it is possible
to use chemicals in such a way that they leave a residue of only
parts per million (the tolerance for DDT), or of  part per million
(the tolerance for parathion), or even of only . part per million
as is required for dieldrin on a great variety of fruits and
vegetables, then why is it not possible, with only a little more care, to prevent the occurrence of any residues at all? is, in fact, is
what is required for some chemicals such as heptachlor, endrin,
and dieldrin on certain crops. If it is considered practical in these
instances, why not for all?
But this is not a complete or final solution, for a zero tolerance
on paper is of little value. At present, as we have seen, more than
per cent of the interstate food shipments slip by without
inspection. A vigilant and aggressive Food and Drug
Administration, with, a greatly increased force of inspectors, is
another urgent need.
is system, howeverdeliberately poisoning our food, then
policing the resultis too reminiscent of Lewis Carrolls White
Knight who thought of a plan to dye ones whiskers green, and
always use so large a fan that they could not be seen. e ultimate
answer is to use less toxic chemicals so that the public hazard
from their misuse is greatly reduced. Such chemicals already
exist: the pyrethrins, rotenone, ryania, and others derived from
plant substances. Synthetic substitutes for the pyrethrins have
recently been developed, and some of the producing countries
stand ready to increase the output of the natural product as the
market may require. Public education as to the nature of the
chemicals offered for sale is sadly needed. e average purchaser
is completely bewildered by the array of available insecticides,
fungicides, and weed killers, and has no way of knowing which are
the deadly ones, which reasonably safe.
In addition to making this change to less dangerous
agricultural pesticides, we should diligently explore the
possibilities of non-chemical methods. Agricultural use of insect
diseases, caused by a bacterium highly specific for certain types of
insects, is already being tried in California, and more extended
tests of this method are under way. A great many other
possibilities exist for effective insect control by methods that will
leave no residues on foods (see Chapter ). Until a large-scale
conversion to these methods has been made, we shall have little
relief from a situation that, by any common-sense standards, is
intolerable. As matters stand now, we are in little better position
than the guests of the Borgias.
