AS THE TIDE of chemicals born of the Industrial Age has arisen
to engulf our environment, a drastic change has come about in
the nature of the most serious public health problems. Only
yesterday mankind lived in fear of the scourges of smallpox,
cholera, and plague that once swept nations before them. Now
our major concern is no longer with the disease organisms that
once were omnipresent; sanitation, better living conditions, and
new drugs have given us a high degree of control over infectious
disease. Today we are concerned with a different kind of hazard
that lurks in our environmenta hazard we ourselves have
introduced into our world as our modern way of life has evolved.
e new environmental health problems are multiple
created by radiation in all its forms, born of the never-ending
stream of chemicals of which pesticides are a part, chemicals now
pervading the world in which we live, acting upon us directly and
indirectly, separately and collectively. eir presence casts a
shadow that is no less ominous because it is formless and obscure,
no less frightening because it is simply impossible to predict the
effects of lifetime exposure to chemical and physical agents that
are not part of the biological experience of man.
We all live under the haunting fear that something may
corrupt the environment to the point where man joins the
dinosaurs as an obsolete form of life, says Dr. David Price of the
United States Public Health Service. And what makes these
thoughts all the more disturbing is the knowledge that our fate
could perhaps be sealed twenty or more years before the
development of symptoms.
Where do pesticides fit into the picture of environmental
disease? We have seen that they now contaminate soil, water, and
food, that they have the power to make our streams Ashless and
our gardens and woodlands silent and birdless. Man, however
much he may like to pretend the contrary, is part of nature. Can
he escape a pollution that is now so thoroughly distributed
throughout our world?
We know that even single exposures to these chemicals, if the
amount is large enough, can precipitate acute poisoning. But this
is not the major problem. e sudden illness or death of farmers,
spraymen, pilots, and others exposed to appreciable quantities of
pesticides are tragic and should not occur. For the population as
a whole, we must be more concerned with the delayed effects of
absorbing small amounts of the pesticides that invisibly
contaminate our world.
Responsible public health officials have pointed out that the
biological effects of chemicals are cumulative over long periods of
time, and that the hazard to the individual may depend on the
sum of the exposures received throughout his lifetime. For these
very reasons the danger is easily ignored. It is human nature to
shrug off what may seem to us a vague threat of future disaster.
Men are naturally most impressed by diseases which have
obvious manifestations, says a wise physician, Dr. Rene Dubos,
yet some of their worst enemies creep on them unobtrusively.
For each of us, as for the robin in Michigan or the salmon in
the Miramichi, this is a problem of ecology, of interrelationships,
of interdependence. We poison the caddis flies in a stream and
the salmon runs dwindle and die. We poison the gnats in a lake
and the poison travels from link to link of the food chain and soon the birds of the lake margins become its victims. We spray our
elms and the following springs are silent of robin song, not
because we sprayed the robins directly but because the poison
traveled, step by step, through the now familiar elm leaf-
earthworm-robin cycle. ese are matters of record, observable,
part of the visible world around us. ey reflect the web of life
or deaththat scientists know as ecology.
But there is also an ecology of the world within our bodies. In
this unseen world minute causes produce mighty effects; the
effect, moreover, is often seemingly unrelated to the cause,
appearing in a part of the body remote from the area where the
original injury was sustained. A change at one point, in one
molecule even, may reverberate throughout the entire system to
initiate changes in seemingly unrelated organs and tissues, says
a recent summary of the present status of medical research. When
one is concerned with the mysterious and wonderful functioning
of the human body, cause and effect are seldom simple and easily
demonstrated relationships. ey may be widely separated both
in space and time. To discover the agent of disease and death
depends on a patient piecing together of many seemingly distinct
and unrelated facts developed through a vast amount of research
in widely separated fields.
We are accustomed to look for the gross and immediate effect
and to ignore all else. Unless this appears promptly and in such
obvious form that it cannot be ignored, we deny the existence of
hazard. Even research men suffer from the handicap of
inadequate methods of detecting the beginnings of injury. e
lack of sufficiently delicate methods to detect injury before
symptoms appear is one of the great unsolved problems in
medicine.
But, someone will object, I have used dieldrin sprays on the
lawn many times but I have never had convulsions like the World
Health Organization spraymenso it hasnt harmed me. It is not
that simple. Despite the absence of sudden and dramatic
symptoms, one who handles such materials is unquestionably
storing up toxic materials in his body. Storage of the chlorinated
hydrocarbons, as we have seen, is cumulative, beginning with the
smallest intake. e toxic materials become lodged in all the fatty
tissues of the body. When these reserves of fat are drawn upon
the poison may then strike quickly. A New Zealand medical
journal recently provided an example. A man under treatment for
obesity suddenly developed symptoms of poisoning. On
examination his fat was found to contain stored dieldrin, which
had been metabolized as he lost weight. e same thing could
happen with loss of weight in illness.
e results of storage, on the other hand, could be even less
obvious. Several years ago the Journal of the American Medical
Association warned strongly of the hazards of insecticide storage
in adipose tissue, pointing out that drugs or chemicals that are
cumulative require greater caution than those having no
tendency to be stored in the tissues. e adipose tissue, we are
warned, is not merely a place for the deposition of fat (which
makes up about  per cent of the body weight), but has many
important functions with which the stored poisons may interfere.
Furthermore, fats are very widely distributed in the organs and
tissues of the whole body, even being constituents of cell
membranes. It is important to remember, therefore, that the fat-
soluble insecticides become stored in individual cells, where they
are in position to interfere with the most vital and necessary
functions of oxidation and energy production. is important
aspect of the problem will be taken up in the next chapter.
One of the most significant facts about the chlorinated
hydrocarbon insecticides is their effect on the liver. Of all organs
in the body the liver is most extraordinary. In its versatility and in
the indispensable nature of its functions it has no equal. It
presides over so many vital activities that even the slightest
damage to it is fraught with serious consequences. Not only does
it provide bile for the digestion of fats, but because of its location
and the special circulatory pathways that converge upon it the
liver receives blood directly from the digestive tract and is deeply
involved in the metabolism of all the principal foodstuffs. It stores
sugar in the form of glycogen and releases it as glucose in carefully
measured quantities to keep the blood sugar at a normal level. It
builds body proteins, including some essential elements of blood
plasma concerned with blood-clotting. It maintains cholesterol at
its proper level in the blood plasma, and inactivates the male and
female hormones when they reach excessive levels. It is a
storehouse of many vitamins, some of which in turn contribute to
its own proper functioning.
Without a normally functioning liver the body would be
disarmeddefenseless against the great variety of poisons that
continually invade it. Some of these are normal by-products of
metabolism, which the liver swiftly and efficiently makes
harmless by withdrawing their nitrogen. But poisons that have no
normal place in the body may also be detoxified. e harmless
insecticides malathion and methoxychlor are less poisonous than
their relatives only because a liver enzyme deals with them,
altering their molecules in such a way that their capacity for harm
is lessened. In similar ways the liver deals with the majority of the
toxic materials to which we are exposed.
Our line of defense against invading poisons or poisons from
within is now weakened and crumbling. A liver damaged by
pesticides is not only incapable of protecting us from poisons, the whole wide range of its activities may be interfered with. Not only
are the consequences far-reaching, but because of their variety
and the fact that they may not immediately appear they may not
be attributed to their true cause.
In connection with the nearly universal use of insecticides that
are liver poisons, it is interesting to note the sharp rise in hepatitis
that began during the s and is continuing a fluctuating climb.
Cirrhosis also is said to be increasing. While it is admittedly
difficult, in dealing with human beings rather than laboratory
animals, to prove that cause A produces effect B, plain common
sense suggests that the relation between a soaring rate of liver
disease and the prevalence of liver poisons in the environment is
no coincidence. Whether or not the chlorinated hydrocarbons
are the primary cause, it seems hardly sensible under the
circumstances to expose ourselves to poisons that have a proven
ability to damage the liver and so presumably to make it less
resistant to disease.
Both major types of insecticides, the chlorinated
hydrocarbons and the organic phosphates, directly affect the
nervous system, although in somewhat different ways. is has
been made clear by an infinite number of experiments on animals
and by observations on human subjects as well. As for DDT, the
first of the new organic insecticides to be widely used, its action is
primarily on the central nervous system of man; the cerebellum
and the higher motor cortex are thought to be the areas chiefly
affected. Abnormal sensations as of prickling, burning, or itching,
as well as tremors or even convulsions may follow exposure to
appreciable amounts, according to a standard textbook of
toxicology.
Our first knowledge of the symptoms of acute poisoning by
DDT was furnished by several British investigators, who delib
erately exposed themselves in order to learn the consequences.
Two scientists at the British Royal Navy Physiological Laboratory
invited absorption of DDT through the skin by direct contact with
walls covered with a water-soluble paint containing  per cent
DDT, overlaid with a thin film of oil. e direct effect on the
nervous system is apparent in their eloquent description of their
symptoms: e tiredness, heaviness, and aching of limbs were
very real things, and the mental state was also most
distressing[there was] extreme irritability  great distaste for
work of any sort  a feeling of mental incompetence in tackling
the simplest mental task. e joint pains were quite violent at
times.
Another British experimenter who applied DDT in acetone
solution to his skin reported heaviness and aching of limbs,
muscular weakness, and spasms of extreme nervous tension. He
took a holiday and improved, but on return to work his condition
deteriorated. He then spent three weeks in bed, made miserable
by constant aching in limbs, insomnia, nervous tension, and
feelings of acute anxiety. On occasion tremors shook his whole
bodytremors of the sort now made all too familiar by the sight
of birds poisoned by DDT. e experimenter lost  weeks from
his work, and at the end of a year, when his case was reported in
a British medical journal, recovery was not complete.
(Despite this evidence, several American investigators
conducting an experiment with DDT on volunteer subjects
dismissed the complaint of headache and pain in every bone as
obviously of psychoneurotic origin.)
ere are now many cases on record in which both the
symptoms and the whole course of the illness point to insecticides
as the cause. Typically, such a victim has had a known exposure
to one of the insecticides, his symptoms have subsided under
treatment which included the exclusion of all insecticides from
his environment, and most significantly have returned with each
renewed contact with the offending chemicals. is sort of
evidenceand no moreforms the basis of a vast amount of
medical therapy in many other disorders. ere is no reason why
it should not serve as a warning that it is no longer sensible to take
the calculated risk of saturating our environment with
pesticides.
Why does not everyone handling and using insecticides
develop the same symptoms? Here the matter of individual
sensitivity enters in. ere is some evidence that women are more
susceptible than men, the very young more than adults, those who
lead sedentary, indoor lives more than those leading a rugged life
of work or exercise in the open. Beyond these differences are
others that are no less real because they are intangible. What
makes one person allergic to dust or pollen, sensitive to a poison,
or susceptible to an infection whereas another is not is a medical
mystery for which there is at present no explanation. e problem
nevertheless exists and it affects significant numbers of the
population. Some physicians estimate that a third or more of their
patients show signs of some form of sensitivity, and that the
number is growing. And unfortunately, sensitivity may suddenly
develop in a person previously insensitive. In fact, some medical
men believe that intermittent exposures to chemicals may
produce just such sensitivity. If this is true, it may explain why
some studies on men subjected to continuous occupational
exposure find little evidence of toxic effects. By their constant
contact with the chemicals these men keep themselves
desensitizedas an allergist keeps his patients desensitized by
repeated small injections of the allergen.
e whole problem of pesticide poisoning is enormously
complicated by the fact that a human being, unlike a laboratory
animal living under rigidly controlled conditions, is never
exposed to one chemical alone. Between the major groups of
insecticides, and between them and other chemicals, there are
interactions that have serious potentials. Whether released into
soil or water or a mans blood, these unrelated chemicals do not
remain segregated; there are mysterious and unseen changes by
which one alters the power of another for harm.
ere is interaction even between the two major groups of
insecticides usually thought to be completely distinct in their
action. e power of the organic phosphates, those poisoners of
the nerve-protective enzyme cholinesterase, may become greater
if the body has first been exposed to a chlorinated hydrocarbon
which injures the liver. is is because, when liver function is
disturbed, the cholinesterase level drops below normal. e
added depressive effect of the organic phosphate may then be
enough to precipitate acute symptoms. And as we have seen, pairs
of the organic phosphates themselves may interact in such a way
as to increase their toxicity a hundredfold. Or the organic
phosphates may interact with various drugs, or with synthetic
materials, food additiveswho can say what else of the infinite
number of man-made substances that now pervade our world?
e effect of a chemical of supposedly innocuous nature can
be drastically changed by the action of another; one of the best
examples is a close relative of DDT called methoxychlor.
(Actually, methoxychlor may not be as free from dangerous
qualities as it is generally said to be, for recent work on
experimental animals shows a direct action on the uterus and a
blocking effect on some of the powerful pituitary hormones
reminding us again that these are chemicals with enormous
biologic effect. Other work shows that methoxychlor has a
potential ability to damage the kidneys.) Because it is not stored
to any great extent when given alone, we are told that
methoxychlor is a safe chemical. But this is not necessarily true.
If the liver has been damaged by another agent, methoxychlor is
stored in the body at too times its normal rate, and will then
imitate the effects of DDT with long-lasting effects on the nervous
system. Yet the liver damage that brings this about might be so
slight as to pass unnoticed. It might have been the result of any of
a number of commonplace situationsusing another insecticide,
using a cleaning fluid containing carbon tetrachloride, or taking
one of the so-called tranquilizing drugs, a number (but not all) of
which are chlorinated hydrocarbons and possess power to
damage the liver.
Damage to the nervous system is not confined to acute
poisoning; there may also be delayed effects from exposure. Long-
lasting damage to brain or nerves has been reported for
methoxychlor and others. Dieldrin, besides its immediate
consequences, can have long delayed effects ranging from loss of
memory, insomnia, and nightmares to mania. Lindane,
according to medical findings, is stored in significant amounts in
the brain and functioning liver tissue and may induce profound
and long lasting effects on the central nervous system. Yet this
chemical, a form of benzene hexachloride, is much used in
vaporizers, devices that pour a stream of volatilized insecticide
vapor into homes, offices, restaurants.
e organic phosphates, usually considered only in relation to
their more violent manifestations in acute poisoning, also have
the power to produce lasting physical damage to nerve tissues
and, according to recent findings, to induce mental disorders.
Various cases of delayed paralysis have followed use of one or
another of these insecticides. A bizarre happening in the United
States during the prohibition era about  was an omen of
things to come. It was caused not by an insecticide but by a
substance belonging chemically to the same group as the organic
phosphate insecticides. During that period some medicinal
substances were being pressed into service as substitutes for
liquor, being exempt from the prohibition law. One of these was
Jamaica ginger. But the United States Pharmacopeia product was
expensive, and bootleggers conceived the idea of making a
substitute Jamaica ginger. ey succeeded so well that their
spurious product responded to the appropriate chemical tests
and deceived the government chemists. To give their false ginger
the necessary tang they had introduced a chemical known as
triorthocresyl phosphate. is chemical, like parathion and its
relatives, destroys the protective enzyme cholinesterase. As a
consequence of drinking the bootleggers product some ,
people developed a permanently crippling type of paralysis of the
leg muscles, a condition now called ginger paralysis. e
paralysis was accompanied by destruction of the nerve sheaths
and by degeneration of the cells of the anterior horns of the spinal
cord.
About two decades later various other organic phosphates
came into use as insecticides, as we have seen, and soon cases
reminiscent of the ginger paralysis episode began to occur. One
was a greenhouse worker in Germany who became paralyzed
several months after experiencing mild symptoms of poisoning
on a few occasions after using parathion. en a group of three
chemical plant workers developed acute poisoning from exposure
to other insecticides of this group. ey recovered under
treatment, but ten days later two of them developed muscular
weakness in the legs. is persisted for  months in one; the
other, a young woman chemist, was more severely affected, with
paralysis in both legs and some involvement of the hands and
arms. Two years later when her case was reported in a medical
journal she was still unable to walk.
e insecticide responsible for these cases Has been
withdrawn from the market, but some of those now in use may be
capable of like harm. Malathion (beloved of gardeners) has
induced severe muscular weakness in experiments on chickens.
is was attended (as in ginger paralysis) by destruction of the
sheaths of the sciatic and spinal nerves.
All these consequences of organic phosphate poisoning, if
survived, may be a prelude to worse. In view of the severe damage
they inflict upon the nervous system, it was perhaps inevitable
that these insecticides would eventually be linked with mental
disease. at link has recently been supplied by investigators at
the University of Melbourne and Prince Henrys Hospital in
Melbourne, who reported on  cases of mental disease. All had
a history of prolonged exposure to organic phosphorus
insecticides. ree were scientists checking the efficacy of sprays;
worked in greenhouses;  were farm workers. eir symptoms
ranged from impairment of memory to schizophrenic and
depressive reactions. All had normal medical histories before the
chemicals they were using boomeranged and struck them down.
Echoes of this sort of thing are to be found, as we have seen,
widely scattered throughout medical literature, sometimes
involving the chlorinated hydrocarbons, sometimes the organic
phosphates. Confusion, delusions, loss of memory, maniaa
heavy price to pay for the temporary destruction of a few insects,
but a price that will continue to be exacted as long as we insist
upon using chemicals that strike directly at the nervous system.
