THE BIOLOGIST George Wald once compared his work on an
exceedingly specialized subject, the visual pigments of the eye, to
a very narrow window through which at a distance one can see
only a crack of light. As one comes closer the view grows wider
and wider, until finally through this same narrow window one is
looking at the universe.
So it is that only when we bring our focus to bear, first on the
individual cells of the body, then on the minute structures within
the cells, and finally on the ultimate reactions of molecules within
these structuresonly when we do this can we comprehend the
most serious and far-reaching effects of the haphazard
introduction of foreign chemicals into our internal environment.
Medical research has only rather recently turned to the
functioning of the individual cell in producing the energy that is
the indispensable quality of life. e extraordinary energy-
producing mechanism of the body is basic not only to health but
to life; it transcends in importance even the most vital organs, for
without the smooth and effective functioning of energy-yielding
oxidation none of the bodys functions can be performed. Yet the
nature of many of the chemicals used against insects, rodents, and
weeds is such that they may strike directly at this system,
disrupting its beautifully functioning mechanism.
e research that led to our present understanding of cellular
oxidation is one of the most impressive accomplishments in all
biology and biochemistry. e roster of contributors to this work
includes many Nobel Prize winners. Step by step it has been going
on for a quarter of a century, drawing on even earlier work for
some of its foundation stones. Even yet it is not complete in all
details. And only within the past decade have all the varied pieces
of research come to form a whole so that biological oxidation
could become part of the common knowledge of biologists. Even
more important is the fact that medical men who received their
basic training before  have had little opportunity to realize
the critical importance of the process and the hazards of
disrupting it.
e ultimate work of energy production is accomplished not
in any specialized organ but in every cell of the body. A living cell,
like a flame, burns fuel to produce the energy on which life
depends. e analogy is more poetic than precise, for the cell
accomplishes its burning with only the moderate heat of the
bodys normal temperature. Yet all these billions of gently
burning little fires spark the energy of life. Should they cease to
burn, no heart could beat, no plant could grow upward defying
gravity, no amoeba could swim, no sensation could speed along a
nerve, no thought could flash in the human brain, said the
chemist Eugene Rabinowitch.
e transformation of matter into energy in the cell is an
ever-flowing process, one of natures cycles of renewal, like a
wheel endlessly turning. Grain by grain, molecule by molecule,
carbohydrate fuel in the form of glucose is fed into this wheel; in its cyclic passage the fuel molecule undergoes fragmentation and
a series of minute chemical changes. e changes are made in
orderly fashion, step by step, each step directed and controlled by
an enzyme of so specialized a function that it does this one thing
and nothing else. At each step energy is produced, waste products
(carbon dioxide and water) are given off, and the altered molecule
of fuel is passed on to the next stage. When the turning wheel
comes full cycle the fuel molecule has been stripped down to a
form in which it is ready to combine with a new molecule coming
in and to start the cycle anew.
is process by which the cell functions as a chemical factory
is one of the wonders of the living world. e fact that all the
functioning parts are of infinitesimal size adds to the miracle.
With few exceptions cells themselves are minute, seen only with
the aid of a microscope. Yet the greater part of the work of
oxidation is performed in a theater far smaller, in tiny granules
within the cell called mitochondria. Although known for more
than  years, these were formerly dismissed as cellular elements
of unknown and probably unimportant function. Only in the
s did their study become an exciting and fruitful field of
research; suddenly they began to engage so much attention that
papers on this subject alone appeared within a five-year
period.
Again one stands in awe at the marvelous ingenuity and
patience by which the mystery of the mitochondria has been
solved. Imagine a particle so small that you can barely see it even
though a microscope has enlarged it for you  times. en
imagine the skill required to isolate this particle, to take it apart
and analyze its components and determine their highly complex
functioning. Yet this has been done with the aid of the electron
microscope and the techniques of the biochemist.
It is now known that the mitochondria are tiny packets of
enzymes, a varied assortment including all the enzymes necessary
for the oxidative cycle, arranged in precise and orderly array on
walls and partitions. e mitochondria are the powerhouses in
which most of the energy-producing reactions occur. After the
first, preliminary steps of oxidation have been performed in the
cytoplasm the fuel molecule is taken into the mitochondria. It is
here that oxidation is completed; it is here that enormous
amounts of energy are released.
e endlessly turning wheels of oxidation within the
mitochondria would turn to little purpose if it were not for this
all-important result. e energy produced at each stage of the
oxidative cycle is in a form familiarly spoken of by the biochemists
as ATP (adenosine triphosphate), a molecule containing three
phosphate groups. e role of ATP in furnishing energy comes
from the fact that it can transfer one of its phosphate groups to
other substances, along with the energy of its bonds of electrons
shuttling back and forth at high speed. us, in a muscle cell,
energy to contract is gained when a terminal phosphate group is
transferred to the contracting muscle. So another cycle takes
placea cycle within a cycle: a molecule of ATP gives up one of
its phosphate groups and retains only two, becoming a
diphosphate molecule, ADP. But as the wheel turns further
another phosphate group is coupled on and the potent ATP is
restored. e analogy of the storage battery has been used: ATP
represents the charged, ADP the discharged battery.
ATP is the universal currency of energyfound in all
organisms from microbes to man. It furnishes mechanical energy
to muscle cells; electrical energy to nerve cells. e sperm cell, the
fertilized egg ready for the enormous burst of activity that will
transform it into a frog or a bird or a human infant, the cell that
must create a hormone, all are supplied with ATP. Some of the
energy of ATP is used in the mitochondrion but most of it is
immediately dispatched into the cell to provide power for other
activities. e location of the mitochondria within certain cells is
eloquent of their function, since they are placed so that energy
can be delivered precisely where it is needed. In muscle cells they
cluster around contracting fibers; in nerve cells they are found at
the junction with another cell, supplying energy for the transfer
of impulses; in sperm cells they are concentrated at the point
where the propellant tail is joined to the head.
e charging of the battery, in which ADP and a free
phosphate group are combined to restore ATP, is coupled to the
oxidative process; the close linking is known as coupled
phosphorylation. If the combination becomes uncoupled, the
means is lost for providing usable energy. Respiration continues
but no energy is produced. e cell has become like a racing
engine, generating heat but yielding no power. en the muscle
cannot contract, nor can the impulse race along the nerve
pathways. en the sperm cannot move to its destination; the
fertilized egg cannot carry to completion its complex divisions
and elaborations. e consequences of uncoupling could indeed
be disastrous for any organism from embryo to adult: in time it
could lead to the death of the tissue or even of the organism.
How can uncoupling be brought about? Radiation is an
uncoupler, and the death of cells exposed to radiation is thought
by some to be brought about in this way. Unfortunately, a good
many chemicals also have the power to separate oxidation from
energy production, and the insecticides and weed killers are well
represented on the list. e phenols, as we have seen, have a
strong effect on metabolism, causing a potentially fatal rise in
temperature; this is brought about by the racing engine effect of
uncoupling. e dinitrophenols and pentachlorophenols are
examples of this group that have widespread use as herbicides.
Another uncoupler among the herbicides is ,-D. Of the
chlorinated hydrocarbons, DDT is a proven uncoupler and
further study will probably reveal others among this group.
But uncoupling is not the only way to extinguish the little
fires in some or all of the bodys billions of cells. We have seen
that each step in oxidation is directed and expedited by a specific
enzyme. When any of these enzymeseven a single one of
themis destroyed or weakened, the cycle of oxidation within the
cell comes to a halt. It makes no difference which enzyme is
affected. Oxidation progresses in a cycle like a turning wheel. If
we thrust a crowbar between the spokes of a wheel it makes no
difference where we do it, the wheel stops turning. In the same
way, if we destroy an enzyme that functions at any point in the
cycle, oxidation ceases. ere is then no further energy
production, so the end effect is very similar to uncoupling.
e crowbar to wreck the wheels of oxidation can be supplied
by any of a number of chemicals commonly used as pesticides.
DDT, methoxychlor, malathion, phenothiazine, and various
dinitro compounds are among the numerous pesticides that have
been found to inhibit one or more of the enzymes concerned in
the cycle of oxidation. ey thus appear as agents potentially
capable of blocking the whole process of energy production and
depriving the cells of utilizable oxygen. is is an injury with most
disastrous consequences, only a few of which can be mentioned
here.
Merely by systematically withholding oxygen, experimenters
have caused normal cells to turn into cancer cells, as we shall see
in the following chapter. Some hint of other drastic consequences
of depriving a cell of oxygen can be seen in animal experiments
on developing embryos. With insufficient oxygen the orderly
processes by which the tissues unfold and the organs develop are
disrupted; malformations and other abnormalities then occur.
Presumably the human embryo deprived of oxygen may also
develop congenital deformities.
ere are signs that an increase in such disasters is being
noticed, even though few look far enough to find all of the causes.
In one of the more unpleasant portents of the times, the Office of
Vital Statistics in  initiated a national tabulation of
malformations at birth, with the explanatory comment that the
resulting statistics would provide needed facts on the incidence
of congenital malformations and the circumstances under which
they occur. Such studies will no doubt be directed largely toward
measuring the effects of radiation, but it must not be overlooked
that many chemicals are the partners of radiation, producing
precisely the same effects. Some of the defects and malformations
in tomorrows children, grimly anticipated by the Office of Vital
Statistics, will almost certainly be caused by these chemicals that
permeate our outer and inner worlds.
It may well be that some of the findings about diminished
reproduction are also linked with interference with biological
oxidation, and consequent depletion of the all-important storage
batteries of ATP. e egg, even before fertilization, needs to be
generously supplied with ATP, ready and waiting for the
enormous effort, the vast expenditure of energy that will be
required once the sperm has entered and fertilization has
occurred. Whether the sperm cell will reach and penetrate the egg
depends upon its own supply of ATP, generated in the
mitochondria thickly clustered in the neck of the cell. Once
fertilization is accomplished and cell division has begun, the
supply of energy in the form of ATP will largely determine
whether the development of the embryo will proceed to
completion. Embryologists studying some of their most
convenient subjects, the eggs of frogs and of sea urchins, have
found that if the ATP content is reduced below a certain critical
level the egg simply stops dividing and soon dies.
It is not an impossible step from the embryology laboratory to
the apple tree where a robins nest holds its complement of blue-
green eggs; but the eggs lie cold, the fires of life that flickered for
a few days now extinguished. Or to the top of a tall Florida pine
where a vast pile of twigs and sticks in ordered disorder holds
three large white eggs, cold and lifeless. Why did the robins and
the eaglets not hatch? Did the eggs of the birds, like those of the
laboratory frogs, stop developing simply because they lacked
enough of the common currency of energythe ATP
moleculesto complete their development? And was the lack of
ATP brought about because in the body of the parent birds and
in the eggs there were stored enough insecticides to stop the little
turning wheels of oxidation on which the supply of energy
depends?
It is no longer necessary to guess about the storage of
insecticides in the eggs of birds, which obviously lend themselves
to this kind of observation more readily than the mammalian
ovum. Large residues of DDT and other hydrocarbons have been
found whenever looked for in the eggs of birds subjected to these
chemicals, either experimentally or in the wild. And the
concentrations have been heavy. Pheasant eggs in a California
experiment contained up to  parts per million of DDT. In
Michigan, eggs taken from the oviducts of robins dead of DDT
poisoning showed concentrations up to  parts per million.
Other eggs were taken from nests left unattended as parent robins
were stricken with poison; these too contained DDT. Chickens
poisoned by aldrin used on a neighboring farm have passed on the
chemical to their eggs; hens experimentally fed DDT laid eggs
containing as much as  parts per million.
Knowing that DDT and other (perhaps all) chlorinated
hydrocarbons stop the energy-producing cycle by inactivating a
specific enzyme or uncoupling the energy-producing mechanism,
it is hard to see how any egg so loaded with residues could
complete the complex process of development: the infinite
number of cell divisions, the elaboration of tissues and organs, the
synthesis of vital substances that in the end produce a living
creature. All this requires vast amounts of energythe little
packets of ATP which the turning of the metabolic wheel alone
can produce.
ere is no reason to suppose these disastrous events are
confined to birds. ATP is the universal currency of energy, and
the metabolic cycles that produce it turn to the same purpose in
birds and bacteria, in men and mice. e fact of insecticide
storage in the germ cells of any species should therefore disturb
us, suggesting comparable effects in human beings.
And there are indications that these chemicals lodge in tissues
concerned with the manufacture of germ cells as well as in the
cells themselves. Accumulations of insecticides have been
discovered in the sex organs of a variety of birds and mammals
in pheasants, mice, and guinea pigs under controlled conditions,
in robins in an area sprayed for elm disease, and in deer roaming
western forests sprayed for spruce budworm. In one of the robins
the concentration of DDT in the testes was heavier than in any
other part of the body. Pheasants also accumulated extraordinary
amounts in the testes, up to  parts per million.
Probably as an effect of such storage in the sex organs, atrophy
of the testes has been observed in experimental mammals. Young
rats exposed to methoxychlor had extraordinarily small testes.
When young roosters were fed DDT, the testes made only  per
cent of their normal growth; combs and wattles, dependent for
their development upon the testicular hormone, were only a third
the normal size.
e spermatozoa themselves may well be affected by loss of
ATP. Experiments show that the motility of bull sperm is
decreased by dinitrophenol, which interferes with the energy-
coupling mechanism with inevitable loss of energy. e same
effect would probably be found with other chemicals were the
matter investigated. Some indication of the possible effect on
human beings is seen in medical reports of oligospermia, or
reduced production of spermatozoa, among aviation crop dusters
applying DDT.
For mankind as a whole, a possession infinitely more valuable
than individual life is our genetic heritage, our link with past and
future. Shaped through long eons of evolution, our genes not only
make us what we are, but hold in their minute beings the future
be it one of promise or threat. Yet genetic deterioration through
man-made agents is the menace of our time, the last and greatest
danger to our civilization.
Again the parallel between chemicals and radiation is exact
and inescapable.
e living cell assaulted by radiation suffers a variety of
injuries: its ability to divide normally may be destroyed, it may
suffer changes in chromosome structure, or the genes, carriers of
hereditary material, may undergo those sudden changes known
as mutations, which cause them to produce new characteristics in
succeeding generations. If especially susceptible the cell may be
killed outright, or finally, after the passage of time measured in years, it may become malignant.
All these consequences of radiation have been duplicated in
laboratory studies by a large group of chemicals known as
radiomimetic or radiation-imitating. Many chemicals used as
pesticidesherbicides as well as insecticidesbelong to this
group of substances that have the ability to damage the
chromosomes, interfere with normal cell division, or cause
mutations. ese injuries to the genetic material are of a kind that
may lead to disease in the individual exposed or they may make
their effects felt in future generations.
Only a few decades ago, no one knew these effects of either
radiation or chemicals. In those days the atom had not been split
and few of the chemicals that were to duplicate radiation had as
yet been conceived in the test tubes of chemists. en in , a
professor of zoology in a Texas university, Dr. H. J. Muller, found
that by exposing an organism to X-radiation, he could produce
mutations in succeeding generations. With Mullers discovery a
vast new field of scientific and medical knowledge was opened up.
Muller later received the Nobel Prize in Medicine for his
achievement, and in a world that soon gained unhappy familiarity
with the gray rains of fallout, even the nonscientist now knows
the potential results of radiation.
Although far less noticed, a companion discovery was made
by Charlotte Auerbach and William Robson at the University of
Edinburgh in the early s. Working with mustard gas, they
found that this chemical produces permanent chromosome
abnormalities that cannot be distinguished from those induced by
radiation. Tested on the fruit fly, the same organism Muller had
used in his original work with X-rays, mustard gas also produced
mutations. us the first chemical mutagen was discovered.
Mustard gas as a mutagen has now been joined by a long list
of other chemicals known to alter genetic material in plants and
animals. To understand how chemicals can alter the course of
heredity, we must first watch the basic drama of life as it is played
on the stage of the living cell.
e cells composing the tissues and organs of the body must
have the power to increase in number if the body is to grow and
if the stream of life is to be kept flowing from generation to
generation. is is accomplished by the process of mitosis, or
nuclear division. In a cell that is about to divide, changes of the
utmost importance occur, first within the nucleus, but eventually
involving the entire cell. Within the nucleus, the chromosomes
mysteriously move and divide, ranging themselves in age-old
patterns that will serve to distribute the determiners of heredity,
the genes, to the daughter cells. First they assume the form of
elongated threads, on which the genes are aligned, like beads on
a string. en each chromosome divides lengthwise (the genes
dividing also). When the cell divides into two, half of each goes to
each of the daughter cells. In this way each new cell will contain a
complete set of chromosomes, and all the genetic information
encoded within them. In this way the integrity of the race and of
the species is preserved; in this way like begets like.
A special kind of cell division occurs in the formation of the
germ cells. Because the chromosome number for a given species
is constant, the egg and the sperm, which are to unite to form a
new individual, must carry to their union only half the species
number. is is accomplished with extraordinary precision by a
change in the behavior of the chromosomes that occurs at one of
the divisions producing those cells. At this time the chromosomes
do not split, but one whole chromosome of each pair goes into
each daughter cell.
In this elemental drama all life is revealed as one. e events
of the process of cell division are common to all earthly life;
neither man nor amoeba, the giant sequoia nor the simple yeast
cell can long exist without carrying on this process of cell division.
Anything that disturbs mitosis is therefore a grave threat to the
welfare of the organism affected and to its descendants.
e major features of cellular organization, including, for
instance, mitosis, must be much older than  million years
more nearly  million, wrote George Gaylord Simpson and
his colleagues Pittendrigh and Tiffany in their broadly
encompassing book entitled Life. In this sense the world of life,
while surely fragile and complex, is incredibly durable through
timemore durable than mountains. is durability is wholly
dependent on the almost incredible accuracy with which the
inherited information is copied from generation to generation.
But in all the thousand million years envisioned by these
authors no threat has struck so directly and so forcefully at that
incredible accuracy as the mid-th century threat of man-
made radiation and man-made and man-disseminated chemicals.
Sir Macfarlane Burnet, a distinguished Australian physician and
a Nobel Prize winner, considers it one of the most significant
medical features of our time that, as a by-product of more and
more powerful therapeutic procedures and the production of
chemical substances outside of biological experiences, the normal
protective barriers that kept mutagenic agents from the internal
organs have been more and more frequently penetrated.
e study of human chromosomes is in its infancy, and so it
has only recently become possible to study the effect of
environmental factors upon them. It was not until  that new
techniques made it possible to determine accurately the number
of chromosomes in the human celland to observe them in
such detail that the presence or absence of whole chromosomes
or even parts of chromosomes could be detected. e whole
concept of genetic damage by something in the environment is
also relatively new, and is little understood except by the
geneticists, whose advice is too seldom sought. e hazard from
radiation in its various forms is now reasonably well
understoodalthough still denied in surprising places. Dr.
Muller has frequently had occasion to deplore the resistance to
the acceptance of genetic principles on the part of so many, not
only of governmental appointees in the policy-making positions,
but also of so many of the medical profession. e fact that
chemicals may play a role similar to radiation has scarcely dawned
on the public mind, nor on the minds of most medical or scientific
workers. For this reason the role of chemicals in general use
(rather than in laboratory experiments) has not yet been assessed.
It is extremely important that this be done.
Sir Macfarlane is not alone in his estimate of the potential
danger. Dr. Peter Alexander, an outstanding British authority, has
said that the radiomimetic chemicals may well represent a
greater danger than radiation. Dr. Muller, with the perspective
gained by decades of distinguished work in genetics, warns that
various chemicals (including groups represented by pesticides)
can raise the mutation frequency as much as radiation. As yet
far too little is known of the extent to which our genes, under
modern conditions of exposure to unusual chemicals, are being
subjected to such mutagenic influences.
e widespread neglect of the problem of chemical mutagens
is perhaps due to the fact that those first discovered were of
scientific interest only. Nitrogen mustard, after all, is not sprayed
upon whole populations from the air; its use is in the hands of
experimental biologists or of physicians who use it in cancer
therapy. (A case of chromosome damage in a patient receiving
such therapy has recently been reported.) But insecticides and
weed killers are brought into intimate contact with large numbers
of people.
Despite the scant attention that has been given to the matter,
it is possible to assemble specific information on a number of
these pesticides, showing that they disturb the cells vital
processes in ways ranging from slight chromosome damage to
gene mutation, and with consequences extending to the ultimate
disaster of malignancy.
Mosquitoes exposed to DDT for several generations turned
into strange creatures called gynandromorphspart male and
part female.
Plants treated with various phenols suffered profound
destruction of chromosomes, changes in genes, a striking number
of mutations, irreversible hereditary changes. Mutations also
occurred in fruit flies, the classic subject of genetics experiments,
when subjected to phenol; these flies developed mutations so
damaging as to be fatal on exposure to one of the common
herbicides or to urethane. Urethane belongs to the group of
chemicals called carbamates, from which an increasing number
of insecticides and other agricultural chemicals are drawn. Two
of the carbamates are actually used to prevent sprouting of
potatoes in storageprecisely because of their proven effect in
stopping cell division. Another antisprouting agent, maleic
hydrazide, is rated a powerful mutagen.
Plants treated with benzene hexachloride (BHC) or lindane
became monstrously deformed with tumorlike swellings on their
roots. eir cells grew in size, being swollen with chromosomes
which doubled in number. e doubling continued in future
divisions until further cell division became mechanically
impossible.
e herbicide ,-D has also produced tumorlike swellings in
treated plants. Chromosomes become short, thick, clumped
together. Cell division is seriously retarded. e general effect is
said to parallel closely that produced by X-rays.
ese are but a few illustrations; many more could be cited.
As yet there has been no comprehensive study aimed at testing
the mutagenic effects of pesticides as such. e facts cited above
are by-products of research in cell physiology or genetics. What
is urgently needed is a direct attack on the problem.
Some scientists who are willing to concede the potent effect
of environmental radiation on man nevertheless question
whether mutagenic chemicals can, as a practical proposition,
have the same effect. ey cite the great penetrating power of
radiation, but doubt that chemicals could reach the germ cells.
Once again we are hampered by the fact that there has been little
direct investigation of the problem in man. However, the finding
of large residues of DDT in the gonads and germ cells of birds and
mammals is strong evidence that the chlorinated hydrocarbons,
at least, not only become widely distributed throughout the body
but come into contact with genetic materials. Professor David E.
Davis at Pennsylvania State University has recently discovered
that a potent chemical which prevents cells from dividing and has
had limited use in cancer therapy can also be used to cause
sterility in birds. Sublethal levels of the chemical halt cell division
in the gonads. Professor Davis has had some success in field trials.
Obviously, then, there is little basis for the hope or belief that the
gonads of any organism are shielded from chemicals in the
environment.
Recent medical findings in the field of chromosome
abnormalities are of extreme interest and significance. In
several British and French research teams found their
independent studies pointing to a common conclusionthat
some of humanitys ills are caused by a disturbance of the normal
chromosome number. In certain diseases and abnormalities
studied by these investigators the number differed from the
normal. To illustrate: it is now known that all typical mongoloids
have one extra chromosome. Occasionally this is attached to
another so that the chromosome number remains the normal .
As a rule, however, the extra is a separate chromosome, making
the number . In such individuals, the original cause of the
defect must have occurred in the generation preceding its
appearance.
A different mechanism seems to operate in a number of
patients, both in America and Great Britain, who are suffering
from a chronic form of leukemia. ese have been found to have
a consistent chromosome abnormality in some of the blood cells.
e abnormality consists of the loss of part of a chromosome. In
these patients the skin cells have a normal complement of
chromosomes. is indicates that the chromosome defect did not
occur in the germ cells that gave rise to these individuals, but
represents damage to particular cells (in this case, the precursors
of blood cells) that occurred during the life of the individual. e
loss of part of a chromosome has perhaps deprived these cells of
their instructions for normal behavior.
e list of defects linked to chromosome disturbances has
grown with surprising speed since the opening of this territory,
hitherto beyond the boundaries of medical research. One, known
only as Klinefelters syndrome, involves a duplication of one of the
sex chromosomes. e resulting individual is a male, but because
he carries two of the X chromosomes (becoming XXY instead of
XY, the normal male complement) he is some what abnormal.
Excessive height and mental defects often accompany the sterility
caused by this condition. In contrast, an individual who receives
only one sex chromosome (becoming XO instead of either XX or
XY) is actually female but lacks many of the secondary sexual
characteristics. e condition is accompanied by various physical
(and sometimes mental) defects, for of course the X chromosome
carries genes for a variety of characteristics. is is known as
Turners syndrome. Both conditions had been described in
medical literature long before the cause was known.
An immense amount of work on the subject of chromosome
abnormalities is being done by workers in many countries. A
group at the University of Wisconsin, headed by Dr. Klaus Patau,
has been concentrating on a variety of congenital abnormalities,
usually including mental retardation, that seem to result from the
duplication of only part of a chromosome, as if somewhere in the
formation of one of the germ cells a chromosome had broken and
the pieces had not been properly redistributed. Such a mishap is
likely to interfere with the normal development of the embryo.
According to present knowledge, the occurrence of an entire
extra body chromosome is usually lethal, preventing survival of
the embryo. Only three such conditions are known to be viable;
one of them, of course, is mongolism. e presence of an extra
attached fragment, on the other hand, although seriously
damaging is not necessarily fatal, and according to the Wisconsin
investigators this situation may well account for a substantial part
of the so far unexplained cases in which a child is born with
multiple defects, usually including mental retardation.
is is so new a field of study that as yet scientists have been
more concerned with identifying the chromosome abnormalities
associated with disease and defective development than with
speculating about the causes. It would be foolish to assume that
any single agent is responsible for damaging the chromosomes or
causing their erratic behavior during cell division. But can we
afford to ignore the fact that we are now filling the environment
with chemicals that have the power to strike directly at the
chromosomes, affecting them in the precise ways that could cause
such conditions? Is this not too high a price to pay for a sproutless
potato or a mosquitoless patio?
We can, if we wish, reduce this threat to our genetic heritage,
a possession that has come down to us through some two billion
years of evolution and selection of living protoplasm, a possession
that is ours for the moment only, until we must pass it on to
generations to come. We are doing little now to preserve its
integrity. Although chemical manufacturers are required by law
to test their materials for toxicity, they are not required to make
the tests that would reliably demonstrate genetic effect, and they
do not do so.
