THE BATTLE of living things against cancer began so long ago
that its origin is lost in time. But it must have begun in a natural
environment, in which whatever life inhabited the earth was
subjected, for good or ill, to influences that had their origin in sun
and storm and the ancient nature of the earth. Some of the
elements of this environment created hazards to which life had to
adjust or perish. e ultraviolet radiation in sunlight could cause
malignancy. So could radiations from certain rocks, or arsenic
washed out of soil or rocks to contaminate food or water supplies.
e environment contained these hostile elements even
before there was life; yet life arose, and over the millions of years
it came to exist in infinite numbers and endless variety. Over the
eons of unhurried time that is natures, life reached an adjustment
with destructive forces as selection weeded out the less adaptable
and only the most resistant survived. ese natural cancer-
causing agents are still a factor in producing malignancy;
however, they are few in number and they belong to that ancient
array of forces to which life has been accustomed from the
beginning.
With the advent of man the situation began to change, for
man, alone of all forms of life, can create cancer-producing
substances, which in medical terminology are called carcinogens.
A few man-made carcinogens have been part of the environment
for centuries. An example is soot, containing aromatic
hydrocarbons. With the dawn of the industrial era the world
became a place of continuous, ever-accelerating change. Instead
of the natural environment there was rapidly substituted an
artificial
one composed of new chemical and physical agents, many of
them possessing powerful capacities for inducing biologic
change. Against these carcinogens which his own activities had
created man had no protection, for even as his biological heritage
has evolved slowly, so it adapts slowly to new conditions. As a
result these powerful substances could easily penetrate the
inadequate defenses of the body.
e history of cancer is long, but our recognition of the agents
that produce it has been slow to mature. e first awareness that
external or environmental agents could produce malignant
change dawned in the mind of a London physician nearly two
centuries ago. In  Sir Percivall Pott declared that the scrotal
cancer so common among chimney sweeps must be caused by the
soot that accumulated on their bodies. He could not furnish the
proof we would demand today, but modern research methods
have now isolated the deadly chemical in soot and proved the
correctness of his perception.
For a century or more after Potts discovery there seems to
have been little further realization that certain of the chemicals in
the human environment could cause cancer by repeated skin
contact, inhalation, or swallowing. True, it had been noticed that
skin cancer was prevalent among workers exposed to arsenic
fumes in copper smelters and tin foundries in Cornwall and
Wales. And it was realized that workers in the cobalt mines in
Saxony and in the uranium mines at Joachimsthal in Bohemia
were subject to a disease of the lungs, later identified as cancer.
But these were phenomena of the pre-industrial era, before the
flowering of the industries whose products were to pervade the
environment of almost every living thing.
e first recognition of malignancies traceable to the age of
industry came during the last quarter of the th century. About
the time that Pasteur was demonstrating the microbial origin of
many infectious diseases, others were discovering the chemical
origin of cancerskin cancers among workers in the new lignite
industry in Saxony and in the Scottish shale industry, along with
other cancers caused by occupational exposure to tar and pitch.
By the end of the th century a half-dozen sources of industrial
carcinogens were known; the th century was to create countless
new cancer-causing chemicals and to bring the general
population into intimate contact with them. In the less than two
centuries intervening since the work of Pott, the environmental
situation has been vastly changed. No longer are exposures to
dangerous chemicals occupational alone; they have entered the
environment of everyoneeven of children as yet unborn. It is
hardly surprising, therefore, that we are now aware of an alarming
increase in malignant disease.
e increase itself is no mere matter of subjective
impressions. e monthly report of the Office of Vital Statistics
for July  states that malignant growths, including those of the
lymphatic and blood-forming tissues, accounted for  per cent
of the deaths in  compared with only  per cent in .
Judging by the present incidence of the disease, the American
Cancer Society estimates that ,, Americans now living
will eventually develop cancer. is means that malignant disease
will strike two out of three families.
e situation with respect to children is even more deeply
disturbing. A quarter century ago, cancer in children was
considered a medical rarity. Today, more American school
children die of cancer than from any other disease. So serious has
this situation become that Boston has established the first
hospital in the United States devoted exclusively to the treatment
of children with cancer. Twelve per cent of all deaths in children
between the ages of one and fourteen are caused by cancer. Large
numbers of malignant tumors are discovered clinically in children
under the age of five, but it is an even grimmer fact that significant
numbers of such growths are present at or before birth. Dr. W. C.
Hueper of the National Cancer Institute, a foremost authority on
environmental cancer, has suggested that congenital cancers and
cancers in infants may be related to the action of cancer-
producing agents to which the mother has been exposed during
pregnancy and which penetrate the placenta to act on the rapidly
developing fetal tissues. Experiments show that the younger the
animal is when it is subjected to a cancer-producing agent the
more certain is the production of cancer. Dr. Francis Ray of the
University of Florida has warned that we may be initiating cancer
in the children of today by the addition of chemicals [to food]
We will not know, perhaps for a generation or two, what the
effects will be.
e problem that concerns us here is whether any of the
chemicals we are using in our attempts to control nature play a
direct or indirect role as causes of cancer. In terms of evidence
gained from animal experiments we shall see that five or possibly
six of the pesticides must definitely be rated as carcinogens. e
list is greatly lengthened if we add those considered by some
physicians to cause leukemia in human patients. Here the
evidence is circumstantial, as it must be since we do not
experiment on human beings, but it is nonetheless impressive.
Still other pesticides will be added as we include those whose
action on living tissues or cells may be considered an indirect
cause of malignancy.
One of the earliest pesticides associated with cancer is arsenic,
occurring in sodium arsenite as a weed killer, and in calcium
arsenate and various other compounds as insecticides. e
association between arsenic and cancer in man and animals is
historic. A fascinating example of the consequences of exposure
to arsenic is related by Dr. Hueper in his Occupational Tumors, a
classic monograph on the subject. e city of Reichenstein in
Silesia had been for almost a thousand years the site of mining for
gold and silver ores, and for several hundred years for arsenic
ores. Over the centuries arsenic wastes accumulated in the
vicinity of the mine shafts and were picked up by streams coming
down from the mountains. e underground water also became
contaminated, and arsenic entered the drinking water. For
centuries many of the inhabitants of this region suffered from
what came to be known as the Reichenstein diseasechronic
arsenicism with accompanying disorders of the liver, skin, and
gastrointestinal and nervous systems. Malignant tumors were a
common accompaniment of the disease. Reichensteins disease is
now chiefly of historic interest, for new water supplies were
provided a quarter of a century ago, from which arsenic was
largely eliminated. In Cordoba Province in Argentina, however,
chronic arsenic poisoning, accompanied by arsenical skin
cancers, is endemic because of the contamination of drinking
water derived from rock formations containing arsenic.
It would not be difficult to create conditions similar to those
in Reichenstein and Cordoba by long continued use of arsenical
insecticides. In the United States the arsenic-drenched soils of
tobacco plantations, of many orchards in the Northwest, and of
blueberry lands in the East may easily lead to pollution of water
supplies.
An arsenic-contaminated environment affects not only man
but animals as well. A report of great interest came from Germany
in . In the area about Freiberg, Saxony, smelters for silver and
lead poured arsenic fumes into the air, to drift out over the
surrounding countryside and settle down upon the vegetation.
According to Dr. Hueper, horses, cows, goats, and pigs, which of
course fed on this vegetation, showed loss of hair and thickening
of the skin. Deer inhabiting nearby forests sometimes had
abnormal pigment spots and precancerous warts. One had a
definitely cancerous lesion. Both domestic and wild animals were
affected by arsenical enteritis, gastric ulcers, and cirrhosis of the
liver. Sheep kept near the smelters developed cancers of the nasal
sinus; at their death arsenic was found in the brain, liver, and
tumors. In the area there was also an extraor dinary mortality
among insects, especially bees. After rainfalls which washed the
arsenical dust from the leaves and carried it along into the water
of brooks and pools, a great many fish died.
An example of a carcinogen belonging to the group of new,
organic pesticides is a chemical widely used against mites and
ticks. Its history provides abundant proof that, despite the
supposed safeguards provided by legislation, the public can be
exposed to a known carcinogen for several years before the slowly
moving legal processes can bring the situation under control. e
story is interesting from another standpoint, proving that what
the public is asked to accept as safe today may turn out
tomorrow to be extremely dangerous.
When this chemical was introduced in , the
manufacturer applied for a tolerance which would sanction the
presence of small residues on any crops that might be sprayed. As
required by law, he had tested the chemical on laboratory animals
and submitted the results with his application. However,
scientists of the Food and Drug Administration interpreted the
tests as showing a possible cancer-producing tendency and the
Commissioner accordingly recommended a zero tolerance,
which is a way of saying that no residues could legally occur on
food shipped across state lines. But the manufacturer had the
legal right to appeal and the case was accordingly reviewed by a
committee. e committees decision was a compromise: a
tolerance of  part per million was to be established and the
product marketed for two years, during which time further
laboratory tests were to determine whether the chemical was
actually a carcinogen.
Although the committee did not say so, its decision meant
that the public was to act as guinea pigs, testing the suspected
carcinogen along with the laboratory dogs and rats. But
laboratory animals give more prompt results, and after the two
years it was evident that this miticide was indeed a carcinogen.
Even at that point, in , the Food and Drug Administration
could not instantly rescind the tolerance which allowed residues
of a known carcinogen to contaminate food consumed by the
public. Another year was required for various legal procedures.
Finally, in December  the zero tolerance which the
Commissioner had recommended in  became effective.
ese are by no means the only known carcinogens among
pesticides. In laboratory tests on animal subjects, DDT has
produced suspicious liver tumors. Scientists of the Food and Drug
Administration who reported the discovery of these tumors were
uncertain how to classify them, but felt there was some
justification for considering them low grade hepatic cell
carcinomas. Dr. Hueper now gives DDT the definite rating of a
chemical carcinogen.
Two herbicides belonging to the carbamate group, IPC and
CIPC, have been found to play a role in producing skin tumors in
mice. Some of the tumors were malignant. ese chemicals seem
to initiate the malignant change, which may then be completed
by other chemicals of types prevalent in the environment.
e weed-killer aminotriazole has caused thyroid cancer in
test animals. is chemical was misused by a number of cranberry
growers in , producing residues on some of the marketed
berries. In the controversy that followed seizure of contaminated
cranberries by the Food and Drug Administration, the fact that
the chemical actually is cancer producing was widely challenged,
even by many medical men. e scientific facts released by the
Food and Drug Administration clearly indicate the carcinogenic
nature of aminotriazole in laboratory rats. When these animals
were fed this chemical at the rate of  parts per million in the
drinking water (or one teaspoonful of chemical in ten thousand
teaspoonfuls of water) they began to develop thyroid tumors at
the th week. After two years, such tumors were present in more
than half the rats examined. ey were diagnosed as various types
of benign and malignant growths. e tumors also appeared at
lower levels of feedingin fact, a level that produced no effect was
not found. No one knows, of course, the level at which
aminotriazole may be carcinogenic for man, but as a professor of
medicine at Harvard University, Dr. David Rutstein, has pointed
out, the level is just as likely to be to mans disfavor as to his
advantage.
As yet insufficient time has elapsed to reveal the full effect of
the new chlorinated hydrocarbon insecticides and of the modern
herbicides. Most malignancies develop so slowly that they may
require a considerable segment of the victims life to reach the
stage of showing clinical symptoms. In the early s women
who painted luminous figures on watch dials swallowed minute
amounts of radium by touching the brushes to their lips; in some
of these women bone cancers developed after a lapse of  or
more years. A period of  to  years or even more has been
demonstrated for some cancers caused by occupational
exposures to chemical carcinogens.
In contrast to these industrial exposures to various
carcinogens the first exposures to DDT date from about  for
military personnel and from about  for civilians, and it was
not until the early fifties that a wide variety of pesticidal chemicals
came into use. e full maturing of whatever seeds of malignancy
have been sown by these chemicals is yet to come.
ere is, however, one presently known exception to the fact
that a long period of latency is common to most malignancies.
is exception is leukemia. Survivors of Hiroshima began to
develop leukemia only three years after the atomic bombing, and
there is now reason to believe the latent period may be
considerably shorter. Other types of cancer may in time be found
to have a relatively short latent period, also, but at present
leukemia seems to be the exception to the general rule of
extremely slow development.
Within the period covered by the rise of modern pesticides,
the incidence of leukemia has been steadily rising. Figures avail
able from the National Office of Vital Statistics clearly establish a
disturbing rise in malignant diseases of the blood-forming tissues.
In the year , leukemia alone claimed , victims. Deaths
from all types of malignancies of blood and lymph totaled ,,
increasing sharply from the , figure of . In terms of
deaths per , of population, the increase is from . in
to . in . e increase is by no means confined to the
United States; in all countries the recorded deaths from leukemia
at all ages are rising at a rate of  to  per cent a year. What does
it mean? To what lethal agent or agents, new to our environment,
are people now exposed with increasing frequency?
Such world-famous institutions as the Mayo Clinic admit
hundreds of victims of these diseases of the blood-forming
organs. Dr. Malcolm Hargraves and his associates in the
Hematology Department at the Mayo Clinic report that almost
without exception these patients have had a history of exposure
to various toxic chemicals, including sprays which contain DDT,
chlordane, benzene, lindane, and petroleum distillates.
Environmental diseases related to the use of various toxic
substances have been increasing, particularly during the past ten
years, Dr. Hargraves believes. From extensive clinical experience
he believes that the vast majority of patients suffering from the
blood dyscrasias and lymphoid diseases have a significant history
of exposure to the various hydrocarbons which in turn includes
most of the pesticides of today. A careful medical history will
almost invariably establish such a relationship. is specialist
now has a large number of detailed case histories based on every
patient he has seen with leukemias, aplastic anemias, Hodgkins
disease, and other disorders of the blood and blood-forming
tissues. ey had all been exposed to these environmental
agents, with a fair amount of exposure, he reports.
What do these case histories show? One concerned a house
wife who abhorred spiders. In mid-August she had gone into her
basement with an aerosol spray containing DDT and petroleum
distillate. She sprayed the entire basement thoroughly, under the
stairs, in the fruit cupboards and in all the protected areas around
ceiling and rafters. As she finished the spraying she began to feel
quite ill, with nausea and extreme anxiety and nervousness.
Within the next few days she felt better, however, and apparently
not suspecting the cause of her difficulty, she repeated the entire
procedure in September, running through two more cycles of
spraying, falling ill, recovering temporarily, spraying again. After
the third use of the aerosol new symptoms developed: fever, pains
in the joints and general malaise, acute phlebitis in one leg. When
examined by Dr. Hargraves she was found to be suffering from
acute leukemia. She died within the following month.
Another of Dr. Hargraves patients was a professional man
who had his office in an old building infested by roaches.
Becoming embarrassed by the presence of these insects, he took
control measures in his own hands. He spent most of one Sunday
spraying the basement and all secluded areas. e spray was a
per cent DDT concentrate suspended in a solvent containing
methylated naphthalenes. Within a short time he began to bruise
and bleed. He entered the clinic bleeding from a number of
hemorrhages. Studies of his blood revealed a severe depression of
the bone marrow called aplastic anemia. During the next five and
one half months he received  transfusions in addition to other
therapy. ere was partial recovery but about nine years later a
fatal leukemia developed.
Where pesticides are involved, the chemicals that figure most
prominently in the case histories are DDT, lindane, benzene
hexachloride, the nitrophenols, the common moth crystal
paradichlorobenzene, chlordane, and, of course, the solvents in
which they are carried. As this physician emphasizes, pure
exposure to a single chemical is the exception, rather than the
rule. e commercial product usually contains combinations of
several chemicals, suspended in a petroleum distillate plus some
dispersing agent. e aromatic cyclic and unsaturated
hydrocarbons of the vehicle may themselves be a major factor in
the damage done the blood-forming organs. From the practical
rather than the medical standpoint this distinction is of little
importance, however, because these petroleum solvents are an
inseparable part of most common spraying practices.
e medical literature of this and other countries contains
many significant cases that support Dr. Hargraves belief in a
cause-and-effect relation between these chemicals and leukemia
and other blood disorders. ey concern such everyday people as
farmers caught in the fallout of their own spray rigs or of planes,
a college student who sprayed his study for ants and remained in
the room to study, a woman who had installed a portable lindane
vaporizer in her home, a worker in a cotton field that had been
sprayed with chlordane and toxaphene. ey carry, half concealed
within their medical terminology, stories of such human tragedies
as that of two young cousins in Czechoslovakia, boys who lived in
the same town and had always worked and played together. eir
last and most fateful employment was at a farm cooperative
where it was their job to unload sacks of an insecticide (benzene
hexachloride). Eight months later one of the boys was stricken
with acute leukemia. In nine days he was dead. At about this time
his cousin began to tire easily and to run a temperature. Within
about three months his symptoms became more severe and he,
too, was hospitalized. Again the diagnosis was acute leukemia,
and again the disease ran its inevitably fatal course.
And then there is the case of a Swedish farmer, strangely
reminiscent of that of the Japanese fisherman Kuboyama of the
tuna vessel the Lucky Dragon. Like Kuboyama, the farmer had
been a healthy man, gleaning his living from the land as
Kuboyama had taken his from the sea. For each man a poison
drifting out of the sky carried a death sentence. For one, it was
radiation-poisoned ash; for the other, chemical dust. e farmer
had treated about  acres of land with a dust containing DDT
and benzene hexachloride. As he worked puffs of wind brought
little clouds of dust swirling about him. In the evening he felt
unusually tired, and during the subsequent days he had a general
feeling of weakness, with backache and aching legs as well as
chills, and was obliged to take to his bed, says a report from the
Medical Clinic at Lund. His condition became worse, however,
and on May  [a week after the spraying] he applied for
admission to the local hospital. He had a high fever and his blood
count was abnormal. He was transferred to the Medical Clinic,
where, after an illness of two and one half months, he died. A
post-mortem examination revealed a complete wasting away of
the bone marrow.
How a normal and necessary process such as cell division can
become altered so that it is alien and destructive is a problem that
has engaged the attention of countless scientists and untold sums
of money. What happens in a cell to change its orderly
multiplication into the wild and uncontrolled proliferation of
cancer?
When answers are found they will almost certainly be
multiple. Just as cancer itself is a disease that wears many guises,
appearing in various forms that differ in their origin, in the course
of their development, and in the factors that influence their
growth or regression, so there must be a corresponding variety of
causes. Yet underlying them all, perhaps, only a few basic kinds of
injuries to the cell are responsible. Here and there, in research
widely scattered and sometimes not undertaken as a cancer study
at all, we see glimmerings of the first light that may one day
illuminate this problem.
Again we find that only by looking at some of the smallest
units of life, the cell and its chromosomes, can we find that wider
vision needed to penetrate such mysteries. Here, in this
microcosm, we must look for those factors that somehow shift the
marvelously functioning mechanisms of the cell out of their
normal patterns.
One of the most impressive theories of the origin of cancer
cells was developed by a German biochemist, Professor Otto
Warburg of the Max Planck Institute of Cell Physiology. Warburg
has devoted a lifetime of study to the complex processes of
oxidation within the cell. Out of this broad background of
understanding came a fascinating and lucid explanation of the
way a normal cell can become malignant.
Warburg believes that either radiation or a chemical
carcinogen acts by destroying the respiration of normal cells, thus
depriving them of energy. is action may result from minute
doses often repeated. e effect, once achieved, is irreversible.
e cells not killed outright by the impact of such a respiratory
poison struggle to compensate for the loss of energy. ey can no
longer carry on that extraordinary and efficient cycle by which
vast amounts of ATP are produced, but are thrown back on a
primitive and far less efficient method, that of fermentation. e
struggle to survive by fermentation continues for a long period of
time. It continues through ensuing cell divisions, so that all the
descendant cells have this abnormal method of respiration. Once
a cell has lost its normal respiration it cannot regain itnot in a
year, not in a decade or in many decades. But little by little, in this
grueling struggle to restore lost energy, those cells that survive
begin to compensate by increased fermentation. It is a Darwinian
struggle, in which only the most fit or adaptable survive. At last
they reach the point where fermentation is able to produce as
much energy as respiration. At this point, cancer cells may be said to have been created from normal body cells.
Warburgs theory explains many otherwise puzzling things.
e long latent period of most cancers is the time required for the
infinite number of cell divisions during which fermentation is
gradually increasing after the initial damage to respiration. e
time required for fermentation to become dominant varies in
different species because of different fermentation rates: a short
time in the rat, in which cancers appear quickly, a long time
(decades even) in man, in whom the development of malignancy
is a deliberate process.
e Warburg theory also explains why repeated small doses
of a carcinogen are more dangerous under some circumstances
than a single large dose. e latter may kill the cells outright,
whereas the small doses allow some to survive, though in a
damaged condition. ese survivors may then develop into
cancer cells. is is why there is no safe dose of a carcinogen.
In Warburgs theory we also find explanation of an otherwise
incomprehensible factthat one and the same agent can be
useful in treating cancer and can also cause it. is, as everyone
knows, is true of radiation, which kills cancer cells but may also
cause cancer. It is also true of many of the chemicals now used
against cancer. Why? Both types of agents damage respiration.
Cancer cells already have a defective respiration, so with
additional damage they die. e normal cells, suffering
respiratory damage for the first time, are not killed but are set on
the path that may eventually lead to malignancy.
Warburgs ideas received confirmation in  when other
workers were able to turn normal cells into cancer cells merely by
depriving them of oxygen intermittently over long periods. en
in  other confirmation came, this time from living animals
rather than tissue cultures. Radioactive tracer substances were
injected into cancerous mice. en by careful measurements of
their respiration, it was found that the fermentation rate was
markedly above normal, just as Warburg had foreseen.
Measured by the standards established by Warburg, most
pesticides meet the criterion of the perfect carcinogen too well for
comfort. As we have seen in the preceding chapter, many of the
chlorinated hydrocarbons, the phenols, and some herbicides
interfere with oxidation and energy production within the cell. By
these means they may be creating sleeping cancer cells, cells in
which an irreversible malignancy will slumber long and
undetected until finallyits cause long forgotten and even
unsuspectedit flares into the open as recognizable cancer.
Another path to cancer may be by way of the chromosomes.
Many of the most distinguished research men in this field look
with suspicion on any agent that damages the chromosomes,
interferes with cell division, or causes mutations. In the view of
these men any mutation is a potential cause of cancer. Although
discussions of mutations usually refer to those in the germ cells,
which may then make their effect felt in future generations, there
may also be mutations in the body cells. According to the
mutation theory of the origin of cancer, a cell, perhaps under the
influence of radiation or of a chemical, develops a mutation that
allows it to escape the controls the body normally asserts over cell
division. It is therefore able to multiply in a wild and unregulated
manner. e new cells resulting from these divisions have the
same ability to escape control, and in time enough such cells have
accumulated to constitute a cancer.
Other investigators point to the fact that the chromosomes in
cancer tissue are unstable; they tend to be broken or damaged, the
number may be erratic, there may even be double sets.
e first investigators to trace chromosome abnormalities all
the way to actual malignancy were Albert Levan and John J.
Biesele, working at the Sloan-Kettering Institute in New York. As
to which came first, the malignancy or the disturbance of the
chromosomes, these workers say without hesitation that the
chromosomal irregularities precede the malignancy. Perhaps,
they speculate, after the initial chromosome damage and the
resulting instability there is a long period of trial and error
through many cell generations (the long latent period of
malignancy) during which a collection of mutations is finally ac
cumulated which allow the cells to escape from control and
embark on the unregulated multiplication that is cancer.
Ojvind Winge, one of the early proponents of the theory of
chromosome instability, felt that chromosome doublings were
especially significant. Is it coincidence, then, that benzene
hexachloride and its relative, lindane, are known through
repeated observations to double the chromosomes in
experimental plantsand that these same chemicals have been
implicated in many well-documented cases of fatal anemias? And
what of the many other pesticides that interfere with cell division,
break chromosomes, cause mutations?
It is easy to see why leukemia should be one of the most
common diseases to result from exposure to radiation or to
chemicals that imitate radiation. e principal targets of physical
or chemical mutagenic agents are cells that are undergoing
especially active division. is includes various tissues but most
importantly those engaged in the production of blood. e bone
marrow is the chief producer of red blood cells throughout life,
sending some  million new cells per second into the
bloodstream of man. White corpuscles are formed in the lymph
glands and in some of the marrow cells at a variable, but still
prodigious, rate.
Certain chemicals, again reminding us of radiation products
like Strontium , have a peculiar affinity for the bone marrow.
Benzene, a frequent constituent of insecticidal solvents, lodges in
the marrow and remains deposited there for periods known to be
as long as  months. Benzene itself has been recognized in
medical literature for many years as a cause of leukemia.
e rapidly growing tissues of a child would also afford
conditions most suitable for the development of malignant cells.
Sir Macfarlane Burnet has pointed out that not only is leukemia
increasing throughout the world but it has become most common
in the three-to four-year age bracket, an age incidence shown by
no other disease. According to this authority, e peak between
three and four years of age can hardly have any other
interpretation than exposure of the young organism to a
mutagenic stimulus around the time of birth.
Another mutagen known to produce cancer is urethane.
When pregnant mice are treated with this chemical not only do
they develop cancer of the lung but their young do, also. e only
exposure of the infant mice to urethane was prenatal in these
experiments, proving that the chemical must have passed through
the placenta. In human populations exposed to urethane or
related chemicals there is a possibility that tumors will develop in
infants through prenatal exposure, as Dr. Hueper has warned.
Urethane as a carbamate is chemically related to the
herbicides IPC and CIPC. Despite the warnings of cancer experts,
carbamates are now widely used, not only as insecticides, weed
killers, and fungicides, but also in a variety of products including
plasticizers, medicines, clothing, and insulating materials.
e road to cancer may also be an indirect one. A substance
that is not a carcinogen in the ordinary sense may disturb the
normal functioning of some part of the body in such a way that
malignancy results. Important examples are the cancers,
especially of the reproductive system, that appear to be linked
with disturbances of the balance of sex hormones; these
disturbances, in turn, may in some cases be the result of
something that affects the ability of the liver to preserve a proper
level of these hormones. e chlorinated hydrocarbons are
precisely the kind of agent that can bring about this kind of
indirect carcinogenesis, because all of them are toxic in some
degree to the liver.
e sex hormones are, of course, normally present in the body
and perform a necessary growth-stimulating function in relation
to the various organs of reproduction. But the body has a built-in
protection against excessive accumulations, for the liver acts to
keep a proper balance between male and female hormones (both
are produced in the bodies of both sexes, although in different
amounts) and to prevent an excess accumulation of either. It
cannot do so, however, if it has been damaged by disease or
chemicals, or if the supply of the B-complex vitamins has been
reduced. Under these conditions the estrogens build up to
abnormally high levels.
What are the effects? In animals, at least, there is abundant
evidence from experiments. In one such, an investigator at the
Rockefeller Institute for Medical Research found that rabbits with
livers damaged by disease show a very high incidence of uterine
tumors, thought to have developed because the liver was no
longer able to inactivate the estrogens in the blood, so that they
subsequently rose to a carcinogenic level. Extensive
experiments on mice, rats, guinea pigs, and monkeys show that
prolonged administration of estrogens (not necessarily at high
levels) has caused changes in the tissues of the reproductive
organs, varying from benign overgrowths to definite
malignancy. Tumors of the kidneys have been induced in
hamsters by administering estrogens.
Although medical opinion is divided on the question, much
evidence exists to support the view that similar effects may occur
in human tissues. Investigators at the Royal Victoria Hospital at
McGill University found two thirds of  cases of uterine cancer
studied by them gave evidence of abnormally high estrogen levels.
In  per cent of a later series of  cases there was similar high
estrogen activity.
It is possible to have liver damage sufficient to interfere with
estrogen elimination without detection of the damage by any tests
now available to the medical profession. is can easily be caused
by the chlorinated hydrocarbons, which, as we have seen, set up
changes in liver cells at very low levels of intake. ey also cause
loss of the B vitamins. is, too, is extremely important, for other
chains of evidence show the protective role of these vitamins
against cancer. e late C. P. Rhoads, onetime director of the
Sloan-Kettering Institute for Cancer Research, found that test
animals exposed to a very potent chemical carcinogen developed
no cancer if they had been fed yeast, a rich source of the natural
B vitamins. A deficiency of these vitamins has been found to
accompany mouth cancer and perhaps cancer of other sites in the
digestive tract. is has been observed not only in the United
States but in the far northern parts of Sweden and Finland, where
the diet is ordinarily deficient in vitamins. Groups prone to
primary liver cancer, as for example the Bantu tribes of Africa, are
typically subject to malnutrition. Cancer of the male breast is also
prevalent in parts of Africa, associated with liver disease and
malnutrition. In postwar Greece enlargement of the male breast
was a common accompaniment of periods of starvation.
In brief, the argument for the indirect role of pesticides in
cancer is based on their proven ability to damage the liver and to
reduce the supply of B vitamins, thus leading to an increase in the
endogenous estrogens, or those produced by the body itself.
Added to these are the wide variety of synthetic estrogens to
which we are increasingly exposedthose in cosmetics, drugs,
foods, and occupational exposures. e combined effect is a
matter that warrants the most serious concern.
Human exposures to cancer-producing chemicals (including
pesticides) are uncontrolled and they are multiple. An individual
may have many different exposures to the same chemical. Arsenic
is an example. It exists in the environment of every individual in
many different guises: as an air pollutant, a contaminant of water,
a pesticide residue on food, in medicines, cosmetics, wood
preservatives, or as a coloring agent in paints and inks. It is quite
possible that no one of these exposures alone would be sufficient
to precipitate malignancyyet any single supposedly safe dose
may be enough to tip the scales that are already loaded with other
safe doses.
Or again the harm may be done by two or more different
carcinogens acting together, so that there is a summation of their
effects. e individual exposed to DDT, for example, is almost
certain to be exposed to other liver-damaging hydrocarbons,
which are so widely used as solvents, paint removers, degreasing
agents, dry-cleaning fluids, and anesthetics. What then can be a
safe dose of DDT?
e situation is made even more complicated by the fact that
one chemical may act on another to alter its effect. Cancer may
sometimes require the complementary action of two chemicals,
one of which sensitizes the cell or tissue so that it may later, under the action of another or promoting agent, develop true
malignancy. us, the herbicides IPC and CIPC may act as
initiators in the production of skin tumors, sowing the seeds of
malignancy that may be brought into actual being by something
elseperhaps a common detergent.
ere may be interaction, too, between a physical and a
chemical agent. Leukemia may occur as a two-step process, the
malignant change being initiated by X-radiation, the promoting
action being supplied by a chemical, as, for example, urethane.
e growing exposure of the population to radiation from various
sources, plus the many contacts with a host of chemicals suggest
a grave new problem for the modern world.
e pollution of water supplies with radioactive materials
poses another problem. Such materials, present as contaminants
in water that also contains chemicals, may actually change the
nature of the chemicals by the impact of ionizing radiation,
rearranging their atoms in unpredictable ways to create new
chemicals.
Water pollution experts throughout the United States are
concerned by the fact that detergents are now a troublesome and
practically universal contaminant of public water supplies. ere
is no practical way to remove them by treatment. Few detergents
are known to be carcinogenic, but in an indirect way they may
promote cancer by acting on the lining of the digestive tract,
changing the tissues so that they more easily absorb dangerous
chemicals, thereby aggravating their effect. But who can foresee
and control this action? In the kaleidoscope of shifting conditions,
what dose of a carcinogen can be safe except a zero dose?
We tolerate cancer-causing agents in our environment at our
peril, as was clearly illustrated by a recent happening. In the
spring of  an epidemic of liver cancer appeared among
rainbow trout in many federal, state, and private hatcheries.
Trout in both eastern and western parts of the United States were
affected; in some areas practically  per cent of the trout over
three years of age developed cancer. is discovery was made
because of a pre-existing arrangement between the
Environmental Cancer Section of the National Cancer Institute
and the Fish and Wildlife Service for the reporting of all fish with
tumors, so that early warning might be had of a cancer hazard to
man from water contaminants.
Although studies are still under way to determine the exact
cause of this epidemic over so wide an area, the best evidence is
said to point to some agent present in the prepared hatchery
feeds. ese contain an incredible variety of chemical additives
and medicinal agents in addition to the basic foodstuffs.
e story of the trout is important for many reasons, but
chiefly as an example of what can happen when a potent
carcinogen is introduced into the enviroment of any species. Dr.
Hueper has described this epidemic as a serious warning that
greatly increased attention must be given to controlling the
number and variety of environmental carcinogens. If such
preventive measures are not taken, says Dr. Hueper, the stage
will be set at a progressive rate for the future occurrence of a
similar disaster to the human population.
e discovery that we are, as one investigator phrased it, living
in a sea of carcinogens is of course dismaying and may easily
lead to reactions of despair and defeatism. Isnt it a hopeless
situation? is the common reaction. Isnt it impossible even to
attempt to eliminate these cancer-producing agents from our
world? Wouldnt it be better not to waste time trying, but instead
to put all our efforts into research to find a cure for cancer?
When this question is put to Dr. Hueper, whose years of
distinguished work in cancer make his opinion one to respect, his
reply is given with the thoughtfulness of one who has pondered it
long, and has a lifetime of research and experience behind his
judgment. Dr. Hueper believes that our situation with regard to
cancer today is very similar to that which faced mankind with
regard to infectious diseases in the closing years of the th
century. e causative relation between pathogenic organisms
and many diseases had been established through the brilliant
work of Pasteur and Koch. Medical men and even the general
public were becoming aware that the human environment was
inhabited by an enormous number of microorganisms capable of
causing disease, just as today carcinogens pervade our
surroundings. Most infectious diseases have now been brought
under a reasonable degree of control and some have been
practically eliminated. is brilliant medical achievement came
about by an attack that was twofoldthat stressed prevention as
well as cure. Despite the prominence that magic bullets and
wonder drugs hold in the laymans mind, most of the really
decisive battles in the war against infectious disease consisted of
measures to eliminate disease organisms from the environment.
An example from history concerns the great outbreak of cholera
in London more than one hundred years ago. A London
physician, John Snow, mapped the occurrence of cases and found
they originated in one area, all of whose inhabitants drew their
water from one pump located on Broad Street. In a swift and
decisive practice of preventive medicine, Dr. Snow removed the
handle from the pump. e epidemic was thereby brought under
controlnot by a magic pill that killed the (then unknown)
organism of cholera, but by eliminating the organism from the
environment. Even therapeutic measures have the important
result not only of curing the patient but of reducing the foci of
infection. e present comparative rarity of tuberculosis results
in large measure from the fact that the average person now
seldom comes into contact with the tubercle bacillus.
Today we find our world filled with cancer-producing agents.
An attack on cancer that is concentrated wholly or even largely
on therapeutic measures (even assuming a cure could be found)
in Dr. Huepers opinion will fail because it leaves untouched the
great reservoirs of carcinogenic agents which would continue to
claim new victims faster than the as yet elusive cure could allay
the disease.
Why have we been slow to adopt this common-sense
approach to the cancer problem? Probably the goal of curing the
victims of cancer is more exciting, more tangible, more
glamorous and rewarding than prevention, says Dr. Hueper. Yet
to prevent cancer from ever being formed is definitely more
humane and can be much more effective than cancer cures. Dr.
Hueper has little patience with the wishful thinking that promises
a magic pill that we shall take each morning before breakfast as
protection against cancer. Part of the public trust in such an
eventual outcome results from the misconception that cancer is a
single, though mysterious disease, with a single cause and,
hopefully, a single cure. is of course is far from the known truth.
Just as environmental cancers are induced by a wide variety of
chemical and physical agents, so the malignant condition itself is
manifested in many different and biologically distinct ways.
e long promised breakthrough, when or if it comes,
cannot be expected to be a panacea for all types of malignancy.
Although the search must be continued for therapeutic measures
to relieve and to cure those who have already become victims of
cancer, it is a disservice to humanity to hold out the hope that the
solution will come suddenly, in a single master stroke. It will come slowly, one step at a time. Meanwhile as we pour our millions into
research and invest all our hopes in vast programs to find cures
for established cases of cancer, we are neglecting the golden
opportunity to prevent, even while we seek to cure.
e task is by no means a hopeless one. In one important
respect the outlook is more encouraging than the situation
regarding infectious disease at the turn of the century. e world
was then full of disease germs, as today it is full of carcinogens.
But man did not put the germs into the environment and his role
in spreading them was involuntary. In contrast, man has put the
vast majority of carcinogens into the environment, and he can, if
he wishes, eliminate many of them. e chemical agents of cancer
have become entrenched in our world in two ways: first, and
ironically, through mans search for a better and easier way of life;
second, because the manufacture and sale of such chemicals has
become an accepted part of our economy and our way of life.
It would be unrealistic to suppose that all chemical
carcinogens can or will be eliminated from the modern world. But
a very large proportion are by no means necessities of life. By their
elimination the total load of carcinogens would be enormously
lightened, and the threat that one in every four will develop
cancer would at least be greatly mitigated. e most determined
effort should be made to eliminate those carcinogens that now
contaminate our food, our water supplies, and our atmosphere,
because these provide the most dangerous type of contact
minute exposures, repeated over and over throughout the years.
Among the most eminent men in cancer research are many
others who share Dr. Huepers belief that malignant diseases can
be reduced significantly by determined efforts to identify the
environmental causes and to eliminate them or reduce their
impact. For those in whom cancer is already a hidden or a visible
presence, efforts to find cures must of course continue. But for
those not yet touched by the disease and certainly for the
generations as yet unborn, prevention is the imperative need.
