TO HAVE RISKED so much in our efforts to mold nature to our
satisfaction and yet to have failed in achieving our goal would
indeed be the final irony. Yet this, it seems, is our situation. e
truth, seldom mentioned but there for anyone to see, is that
nature is not so easily molded and that the insects are finding
ways to circumvent our chemical attacks on them.
e insect world is natures most astonishing phenomenon,
said the Dutch biologist C. J. Briejer. Nothing is impossible to it;
the most improbable things commonly occur there. One who
penetrates deeply into its mysteries is continually breathless with
wonder. He knows that anything can happen, and that the
completely impossible often does.
e impossible is now happening on two broad fronts. By a
process of genetic selection, the insects are developing strains
resistant to chemicals. is will be discussed in the following
chapter. But the broader problem, which we shall look at now, is
the fact that our chemical attack is weakening the defenses
inherent in the environment itself, defenses designed to keep the
various species in check. Each time we breach these defenses a
horde of insects pours through.
From all over the world come reports that make it clear we are
in a serious predicament. At the end of a decade or more of
intensive chemical control, entomologists were finding that
problems they had considered solved a few years earlier had
returned to plague them. And new problems had arisen as insects
once present only in insignificant numbers had increased to the
status of serious pests. By their very nature chemical controls are
self-defeating, for they have been devised and applied without
taking into account the complex biological systems against which
they have been blindly hurled. e chemicals may have been
pretested against a few individual species, but not against living
communities.
In some quarters nowadays it is fashionable to dismiss the
balance of nature as a state of affairs that prevailed in an earlier,
simpler worlda state that has now been so thoroughly upset
that we might as well forget it. Some find this a convenient
assumption, but as a chart for a course of action it is highly
dangerous. e balance of nature is not the same today as in
Pleistocene times, but it is still there: a complex, precise, and
highly integrated system of relationships between living things
which cannot safely be ignored any more than the law of gravity
can be defied with impunity by a man perched on the edge of a
cliff. e balance of nature is not a status quo; it is fluid, ever
shifting, in a constant state of adjustment. Man, too, is part of this
balance. Sometimes the balance is in his favor; sometimesand
all too often through his own activitiesit is shifted to his
disadvantage.
Two critically important facts have been overlooked in
designing the modern insect control programs. e first is that
the really effective control of insects is that applied by nature, not
by man. Populations are kept in check by something the
ecologists call the resistance of the environment, and this has
been so since the first life was created. e amount of food
available, conditions of weather and climate, the presence of
competing or predatory species, all are critically important. e
greatest single factor in preventing insects from overwhelming
the rest of the world is the internecine warfare which they carry
out among themselves, said the entomologist Robert Metcalf.
Yet most of the chemicals now used kill all insects, our friends
and enemies alike.
e second neglected fact is the truly explosive power of a
species to reproduce once the resistance of the environment has
been weakened. e fecundity of many forms of life is almost
beyond our power to imagine, though now and then we have
suggestive glimpses. I remember from student days the miracle
that could be wrought in a jar containing a simple mixture of hay
and water merely by adding to it a few drops of material from a
mature culture of protozoa. Within a few days the jar would
contain a whole galaxy of whirling, darting lifeuncountable
trillions of the slipper animalcule, Paramecium, each small as a
dust grain, all multiplying without restraint in their temporary
Eden of favorable temperatures, abundant food, absence of
enemies. Or I think of shore rocks white with barnacles as far as
the eye can see, or of the spectacle of passing through an immense
school of jellyfish, mile after mile, with seemingly no end to the
pulsing, ghostly forms scarcely more substantial than the water
itself.
We see the miracle of natures control at work when the cod
move through winter seas to their spawning grounds, where each
female deposits several millions of eggs. e sea does not become
a solid mass of cod as it would surely do if all the progeny of all
the cod were to survive. e checks that exist in nature are such
that out of the millions of young produced by each pair only
enough, on the average, survive to adulthood to replace the parent
fish.
Biologists used to entertain themselves by speculating as to
what would happen if, through some unthinkable catastrophe,
the natural restraints were thrown off and all the progeny of a
single individual survived. us omas Huxley a century ago
calculated that a single female aphis (which has the curious power
of reproducing without mating) could produce progeny in a single
years time whose total weight would equal that of the inhabitants
of the Chinese empire of his day.
Fortunately for us such an extreme situation is only
theoretical, but the dire results of upsetting natures own
arrangements are well known to students of animal populations.
e stockmans zeal for eliminating the coyote has resulted in
plagues of field mice, which the coyote formerly controlled. e
oft repeated story of the Kaibab deer in Arizona is another case in
point. At one time the deer population was in equilibrium with its
environment. A number of predatorswolves, pumas, and
coyotesprevented the deer from outrunning their food supply.
en a campaign was begun to conserve the deer by killing off
their enemies. Once the predators were gone, the deer increased
prodigiously and soon there was not enough food for them. e
browse line on the trees went higher and higher as they sought
food, and in time many more deer were dying of starvation than
had formerly been killed by predators. e whole environment,
moreover, was damaged by their desperate efforts to find food.
e predatory insects of field and forests play the same role as
the wolves and coyotes of the Kaibab. Kill them off and the
population of the prey insect surges upward.
No one knows how many species of insects inhabit the earth
because so many are yet to be identified. But more than ,
have already been described. is means that in terms of the
number of species,  to  per cent of the earths creatures are
insects. e vast majority of these insects are held in check by
natural forces, without any intervention by man. If this were not
so, it is doubtful that any conceivable volume of chemicalsor
any other methodscould possibly keep down their populations.
e trouble is that we are seldom aware of the protection
afforded by natural enemies until it fails. Most of us walk unseeing
through the world, unaware alike of its beauties, its wonders, and
the strange and sometimes terrible intensity of the lives that are
being lived about us. So it is that the activities of the insect
predators and parasites are known to few. Perhaps we may have
noticed an oddly shaped insect of ferocious mien on a bush in the
garden and been dimly aware that the praying mantis lives at the
expense of other insects. But we see with understanding eye only
if we have walked in the garden at night and here and there with
a flashlight have glimpsed the mantis stealthily creeping upon her
prey. en we sense something of the drama of the hunter and
the hunted. en we begin to feel something of that relentlessly
pressing force by which nature controls her own.
e predatorsinsects that kill and consume other insects
are of many kinds. Some are quick and with the speed of swallows
snatch their prey from the air. Others plod methodically along a
stem, plucking off and devouring sedentary insects like the
aphids. e yellowjackets capture soft-bodied insects and feed the
juices to their young. Muddauber wasps build columned nests of
mud under the eaves of houses and stock them with insects on
which their young will feed. e horseguard wasp hovers above
herds of grazing cattle, destroying the blood-sucking flies that
torment them. e loudly buzzing syrphid fly, often mistaken for
a bee, lays its eggs on leaves of aphis-infested plants; the hatching
larvae then consume immense numbers of aphids. Ladybugs or
lady beetles are among the most effective destroyers of aphids,
scale insects, and other plant-eating insects. Literally hundreds of
aphids are consumed by a single ladybug to stoke the little fires of
energy which she requires to produce even a single batch of eggs.
Even more extraordinary in their habits are the parasitic
insects. ese do not kill their hosts outright. Instead, by a variety
of adaptations they utilize their victims for the nurture of their
own young. ey may deposit their eggs within the larvae or eggs
of their prey, so that their own developing young may find food
by consuming the host. Some attach their eggs to a caterpillar by
means of a sticky solution; on hatching, the larval parasite bores
through the skin of the host. Others, led by an instinct that
simulates foresight, merely lay their eggs on a leaf so that a
browsing caterpillar will eat them inadvertently.
Everywhere, in field and hedgerow and garden and forest, the
insect predators and parasites are at work. Here, above a pond,
the dragonflies dart and the sun strikes fire from their wings. So
their ancestors sped through swamps where huge reptiles lived.
Now, as in those ancient times, the sharp-eyed dragonflies
capture mosquitoes in the air, scooping them in with basket-
shaped legs. In the waters below, their young, the dragonfly
nymphs, or naiads, prey on the aquatic stages of mosquitoes and
other insects.
Or there, almost invisible against a leaf, is the lacewing, with
green gauze wings and golden eyes, shy and secretive, descendant
of an ancient race that lived in Permian times. e adult lacewing
feeds mostly on plant nectars and the honeydew of aphids, and in
time she lays her eggs, each on the end of a long stalk which she
fastens to a leaf. From these emerge her childrenstrange,
bristled larvae called aphis lions, which live by preying on aphids,
scales, or mites, which they capture and suck dry of fluid. Each
may consume several hundred aphids before the ceaseless turning
of the cycle of its life brings the time when it will spin a white
silken cocoon in which to pass the pupal stage.
And there are many wasps, and flies as well, whose very
existence depends on the destruction of the eggs or larvae of other
insects through parasitism. Some of the egg parasites are
exceedingly minute wasps, yet by their numbers and their great
activity they hold down the abundance of many crop-destroying
species.
All these small creatures are workingworking in sun and
rain, during the hours of darkness, even when winters grip has
damped down the fires of life to mere embers. en this vital force
is merely smoldering, awaiting the time to flare again into activity
when spring awakens the insect world. Meanwhile, under the
white blanket of snow, below the frost-hardened soil, in crevices
in the bark of trees, and in sheltered caves, the parasites and the
predators have found ways to tide themselves over the season of
cold.
e eggs of the mantis are secure in little cases of thin
parchment attached to the branch of a shrub by the mother who
lived her life span with the summer that is gone.
e female Polistes wasp, taking shelter in a forgotten corner
of some attic, carries in her body the fertilized eggs, the heritage
on which the whole future of her colony depends. She, the lone
survivor, will start a small paper nest in the spring, lay a few eggs
in its cells, and carefully rear a small force of workers. With their
help she will then enlarge the nest and develop the colony. en
the workers, foraging ceaselessly through the hot days of summer,
will destroy countless caterpillars.
us, through the circumstances of their lives, and the nature
of our own wants, all these have been our allies in keeping the
balance of nature tilted in our favor. Yet we have turned our
artillery against our friends. e terrible danger is that we have
grossly underestimated their value in keeping at bay a dark tide of
enemies that, without their help, can overrun us.
e prospect of a general and permanent lowering of
environmental resistance becomes grimly and increasingly real
with each passing year as the number, variety, and destructiveness
of insecticides grows. With the passage of time we may expect
progressively more serious outbreaks of insects, both disease-
carrying and crop-destroying species, in excess of anything we
have ever known.
Yes, but isnt this all theoretical? you may ask. Surely it
wont really happennot in my lifetime, anyway.
But it is happening, here and now. Scientific journals had
already recorded some  species involved in violent dislocations
of natures balance by . More examples are being found every
year. A recent review of the subject contained references to
papers reporting or discussing unfavorable upsets in the balance
of insect populations caused by pesticides.
Sometimes the result of chemical spraying has been a
tremendous upsurge of the very insect the spraying was intended
to control, as when blackflies in Ontario became  times more
abundant after spraying than they had been before. Or when in
England an enormous outbreak of the cabbage aphidan
outbreak that had no parallel on recordfollowed spraying with
one of the organic phosphorus chemicals.
At other times spraying, while reasonably effective against the
target insect, has let loose a whole Pandoras box of destructive
pests that had never previously been abundant enough to cause
trouble. e spider mite, for example, has become practically a
worldwide pest as DDT and other insecticides have killed off its
enemies. e spider mite is not an insect. It is a barely visible
eight-legged creature belonging to the group that includes
spiders, scorpions, and ticks. It has mouth parts adapted for
piercing and sucking, and a prodigious appetite for the
chlorophyll that makes the world green. It inserts these minute
and stiletto-sharp mouth parts into the outer cells of leaves and
evergreen needles and extracts the chlorophyll. A mild infesta
tion gives trees and shrubbery a mottled or salt-and-pepper
appearance; with a heavy mite population, foliage turns yellow
and falls.
is is what happened in some of the western national forests
a few years ago, when in  the United States Forest Service
sprayed some , acres of forested lands with DDT. e
intention was to control the spruce budworm, but the following
summer it was discovered that a problem worse than the
budworm damage had been created. In surveying the forests from
the air, vast blighted areas could be seen where the magnificent
Douglas firs were turning brown and dropping their needles. In
the Helena National Forest and on the western slopes of the Big
Belt Mountains, then in other areas of Montana and down into
Idaho the forests looked as though they had been scorched. It was
evident that this summer of  had brought the most extensive
and spectacular infestation of spider mites in history. Almost all
of the sprayed area was affected. Nowhere else was the damage
evident. Searching for precedents, the foresters could remember
other scourges of spider mites, though less dramatic than this
one. ere had been similar trouble along the Madison River in
Yellowstone Park in , in Colorado  years later, and then in
New Mexico in . Each of these outbreaks had followed forest
spraying with insecticides. (e  spraying, occurring before
the DDT era, employed lead arsenate.)
Why does the spider mite appear to thrive on insecticides?
Besides the obvious fact that it is relatively insensitive to them,
there seem to be two other reasons. In nature it is kept in check
by various predators such as ladybugs, a gall midge, predaceous
mites and several pirate bugs, all of them extremely sensitive to
insecticides. e third reason has to do with population pressure
within the spider mite colonies. An undisturbed colony of mites
is a densely settled community, huddled under a protective
webbing for concealment from its enemies. When sprayed, the
colonies disperse as the mites, irritated though not killed by the
chemicals, scatter out in search of places where they will not be
disturbed. In so doing they find a far greater abundance of space
and food than was available in the former colonies. eir enemies
are now dead so there is no need for the mites to spend their
energy in secreting protective webbing. Instead, they pour all
their energies into producing more mites. It is not uncommon for
their egg production to be increased threefoldall through the
beneficent effect of insecticides.
In the Shenandoah Valley of Virginia, a famous apple-
growing region, hordes of a small insect called the red-banded leaf
roller arose to plague the growers as soon as DDT began to
replace arsenate of lead. Its depredations had never before been
important; soon its toll rose to  per cent of the crop and it
achieved the status of the most destructive pest of apples, not only
in this region but throughout much of the East and Midwest, as
the use of DDT increased.
e situation abounds in ironies. In the apple orchards of
Nova Scotia in the late s the worst infestations of the codling
moth (cause of wormy apples) were in the orchards regularly
sprayed. In unsprayed orchards the moths were not abundant
enough to cause real trouble.
Diligence in spraying had a similarly unsatisfactory reward in
the eastern Sudan, where cotton growers had a bitter experience
with DDT. Some , acres of cotton were being grown under
irrigation in the Gash Delta. Early trials of DDT having given
apparently good results, spraying was intensified. It was then that
trouble began. One of the most destructive enemies of cotton is
the bollworm. But the more cotton was sprayed, the more
bollworms appeared. e unsprayed cotton suffered less damage
to fruits and later to mature bolls than the sprayed, and in twice-
sprayed fields the yield of seed cotton dropped significantly.
Although some of the leaf-feeding insects were eliminated, any
benefit that might thus have been gained was more than offset by
bollworm damage. In the end the growers were faced with the
unpleasant truth that their cotton yield would have been greater
had they saved themselves the trouble and expense of spraying.
In the Belgian Congo and Uganda the results of heavy
applications of DDT against an insect pest of the coffee bush were
almost catastrophic. e pest itself was found to be almost
completely unaffected by the DDT, while its predator was
extremely sensitive.
In America, farmers have repeatedly traded one insect enemy
for a worse one as spraying upsets the population dynamics of the
insect world. Two of the mass-spraying programs recently carried
out have had precisely this effect. One was the fire ant eradication
program in the South; the other was the spraying for the Japanese
beetle in the Midwest. (See Chapters  and .)
When a wholesale application of heptachlor was made to the
farmlands in Louisiana in , the result was the unleashing of
one of the worst enemies of the sugarcane cropthe sugarcane
borer. Soon after the heptachlor treatment, damage by borers
increased sharply. e chemical aimed at the fire ant had killed
off the enemies of the borer. e crop was so severely damaged
that farmers sought to bring suit against the state for negligence
in not warning them that this might happen.
e same bitter lesson was learned by Illinois farmers. After
the devastating bath of dieldrin recently administered to the
farmlands in eastern Illinois for the control of the Japanese beetle,
farmers discovered that corn borers had increased enormously in
the treated area. In fact, corn grown in fields within this area
contained almost twice as many of the destructive larvae of this
insect as did the corn grown outside. e farmers may not yet be
aware of the biological basis of what has happened, but they need
no scientists to tell them they have made a poor bargain. In trying
to get rid of one insect, they have brought on a scourge of a much
more destructive one. Accord ing to Department of Agriculture
estimates, total damage by the Japanese beetle in the United
States adds up to about  million dollars a year, while damage by
the corn borer runs to about  million.
It is worth noting that natural forces had been heavily relied
on for control of the corn borer. Within two years after this insect
was accidentally introduced from Europe in , the United
States Government had mounted one of its most intensive
programs for locating and importing parasites of an insect pest.
Since that time  species of parasites of the corn borer have been
brought in from Europe and the Orient at considerable expense.
Of these,  are recognized as being of distinct value in control.
Needless to say, the results of all this work are now jeopardized as the enemies of the corn borer are killed off by the sprays.
If this seems absurd, consider the situation in the citrus groves
of California, where the worlds most famous and successful
experiment in biological control was carried out in the s. In
a scale insect that feeds on the sap of citrus trees appeared
in California and within the next  years developed into a pest
so destructive that the fruit crop in many orchards was a complete
loss. e young citrus industry was threatened with destruction.
Many farmers gave up and pulled out their trees. en a parasite
of the scale insect was imported from Australia, a small lady
beetle called the vedalia. Within only two years after the first
shipment of the beetles, the scale was under complete control
throughout the citrus-growing sections of California. From that
time on one could search for days among the orange groves
without finding a single scale insect.
en in the s the citrus growers began to experiment
with glamorous new chemicals against other insects. With the
advent of DDT and the even more toxic chemicals to follow, the
populations of the vedalia in many sections of California were
wiped out. Its importation had cost the government a mere
. Its activities had saved the fruit growers several millions of
dollars a year, but in a moment of heedlessness the benefit was
canceled out. Infestations of the scale insect quickly reappeared
and damage exceeded anything that had been seen for fifty years.
is possibly marked the end of an era, said Dr. Paul
DeBach of the Citrus Experiment Station in Riverside. Now
control of the scale has become enormously complicated. e
vedalia can be maintained only by repeated releases and by the
most careful attention to spray schedules, to minimize their
contact with insecticides. And regardless of what the citrus
growers do, they are more or less at the mercy of the owners of
adjacent acreages, for severe damage has been done by
insecticidal drift.
All these examples concern insects that attack agricultural
crops. What of those that carry disease? ere have already been
warnings. On Nissan Island in the South Pacific, for example,
spraying had been carried on intensively during the Second
World War, but was stopped when hostilities came to an end.
Soon swarms of a malaria-carrying mosquito reinvaded the
island. All of its predators had been killed off and there had not
been time for new populations to become established. e way
was therefore clear for a tremendous population explosion.
Marshall Laird, who has described this incident, compares
chemical control to a treadmill; once we have set foot on it we are
unable to stop for fear of the consequences.
In some parts of the world disease can be linked with spraying
in quite a different way. For some reason, snail-like mollusks seem
to be almost immune to the effects of insecticides. is has been
observed many times. In the general holocaust that followed the
spraying of salt marshes in eastern Florida (pages -), aquatic
snails alone survived. e scene as described was a macabre
picturesomething that might have been created by a surrealist
brush. e snails moved among the bodies of the dead fishes and
the moribund crabs, devouring the victims of the death rain of
poison.
But why is this important? It is important because many
aquatic snails serve as hosts of dangerous parasitic worms that
spend part of their life cycle in a mollusk, part in a human being.
Examples are the blood flukes, or schistosoma, that cause serious
disease in man when they enter the body by way of drinking water
or through the skin when people are bathing in infested waters.
e flukes are released into the water by the host snails. Such
diseases are especially prevalent in parts of Asia and Africa.
Where they occur, insect control measures that favor a vast
increase of snails are likely to be followed by grave consequences.
And of course man is not alone in being subject to snail-borne
disease. Liver disease in cattle, sheep, goats, deer, elk, rabbits, and
various other warm-blooded animals may be caused by liver
flukes that spend part of their life cycles in fresh-water snails.
Livers infested with these worms are unfit for use as human food
and are routinely condemned. Such rejections cost American
cattlemen about / million dollars annually. Anything that acts
to increase the number of snails can obviously make this problem
an even more serious one.
Over the past decade these problems have cast long shadows,
but we have been slow to recognize them. Most of those best
fitted to develop natural controls and assist in putting them into
effect have been too busy laboring in the more exciting vineyards
of chemical control. It was reported in  that only  per cent
of all the economic entomologists in the country were then
working in the field of biological controls. A substantial number
of the remaining  per cent were engaged in research on
chemical insecticides.
Why should this be? e major chemical companies are
pouring money into the universities to support research on
insecticides. is creates attractive fellowships for graduate stu
dents and attractive staff positions. Biological-control studies, on
the other hand, are never so endowedfor the simple reason that
they do not promise anyone the fortunes that are to be made in
the chemical industry. ese are left to state and federal agencies,
where the salaries paid are far less.
is situation also explains the otherwise mystifying fact that
certain outstanding entomologists are among the leading
advocates of chemical control. Inquiry into the background of
some of these men reveals that their entire research program is
supported by the chemical industry. eir professional prestige,
sometimes their very jobs depend on the perpetuation of
chemical methods. Can we then expect them to bite the hand that
literally feeds them? But knowing their bias, how much credence
can we give to their protests that insecticides are harmless?
Amid the general acclaim for chemicals as the principal
method of insect control, minority reports have occasionally been
filed by those few entomologists who have not lost sight of the
fact that they are neither chemists nor engineers, but biologists.
F. H. Jacob in England has declared that the activities of many
so-called economic entomologists would make it appear that they
operate in the belief that salvation lies at the end of a spray nozzle
that when they have created problems of resurgence or
resistance or mammalian toxicity, the chemist will be ready with
another pill. at view is not held here  Ultimately only the
biologist will provide the answers to the basic problems of pest
control.
Economic entomologists must realize, wrote A. D. Pickett of
Nova Scotia, that they are dealing with living things  their work
must be more than simply insecticide testing or a quest for highly
destructive chemicals. Dr. Pickett himself was a pioneer in the
field of working out sane methods of insect control that take full
advantage of the predatory and parasitic species. e method
which he and his associates evolved is today a shining model but
one too little emulated. Only in the integrated control programs
developed by some California entomologists do we find anything
comparable in this country.
Dr. Pickett began his work some thirty-five years ago in the
apple orchards of the Annapolis Valley in Nova Scotia, once one
of the most concentrated fruit-growing areas in Canada. At that
time it was believed that insecticidesthen inorganic
chemicalswould solve the problems of insect control, that the
only task was to induce fruit growers to follow the recommended
methods. But the rosy picture failed to materialize. Somehow the
insects persisted. New chemicals were added, better spraying
equipment was devised, and the zeal for spraying increased, but
the insect problem did not get any better. en DDT promised to
obliterate the nightmare of codling moth outbreaks. What
actually resulted from its use was an unprecedented scourge of
mites. We move from crisis to crisis, merely trading one problem
for another, said Dr. Pickett.
At this point, however, Dr. Pickett and his associates struck
out on a new road instead of going along with other entomologists
who continued to pursue the will-o-the-wisp of the ever more
toxic chemical. Recognizing that they had a strong ally in nature,
they devised a program that makes maximum use of natural
controls and minimum use of insecticides. Whenever insecticides
are applied only minimum dosages are usedbarely enough to
control the pest without avoidable harm to beneficial species.
Proper timing also enters in. us, if nicotine sulphate is applied
before rather than after the apple blossoms turn pink one of the
important predators is spared, probably because it is still in the
egg stage.
Dr. Pickett uses special care to select chemicals that will do as
little harm as possible to insect parasites and predators. When
we reach the point of using DDT, parathion, chlordane, and other
new insecticides as routine control measures in the same way we
have used the inorganic chemicals in the past, entomologists
interested in biological control may as well throw in the sponge,
he says. Instead of these highly toxic, broad-spectrum
insecticides, he places chief reliance on ryania (derived from
ground stems of a tropical plant), nicotine sulphate, and lead
arsenate. In certain situations very weak concentrations of DDT
or malathion are used ( or  ounces per  gallonsin contrast
to the usual  or  pounds per  gallons). Although these two
are the least toxic of the modern insecticides, Dr. Pickett hopes
by further research to replace them with safer and more selective
materials.
How well has this program worked? Nova Scotia orchardists
who are following Dr. Picketts modified spray program are
producing as high a proportion of first-grade fruit as are those
who are using intensive chemical applications. ey are also
getting as good production. ey are getting these results,
moreover, at a substantially lower cost. e outlay for insecticides
in Nova Scotia apple orchards is only from  to  per cent of
the amount spent in most other apple-growing areas.
More important than even these excellent results is the fact
that the modified program worked out by these Nova Scotian
entomologists is not doing violence to natures balance. It is well
on the way to realizing the philosophy stated by the Canadian
entomologist G. C. Ullyett a decade ago: We must change our
philosophy, abandon our attitude of human superiority and admit
that in many cases in natural environments we find ways and
means of limiting populations of organisms in a more economical
way than we can do it ourselves.
