IF DARWIN were alive today the insect world would delight and
astound him with its impressive verification of his theories of the
survival of the fittest. Under the stress of intensive chemical
spraying the weaker members of the insect populations are being
weeded out. Now, in many areas and among many species only
the strong and fit remain to defy our efforts to control them.
Nearly half a century ago, a professor of entomology at
Washington State College, A. L. Melander, asked the now purely
rhetorical question, Can insects become resistant to sprays? If
the answer seemed to Melander unclear, or slow in coming, that
was only because he asked his question too soon in  instead
of  years later. In the pre-DDT era, inorganic chemicals, applied
on a scale that today would seem extraordinarily modest,
produced here and there strains of insects that could survive
chemical spraying or dusting. Melander himself had run into
difficulty with the San Jose scale, for some years satisfactorily
controlled by spraying with lime sulfur. en in the Clarkston
area of Washington the insects became refractorythey were
harder to kill than in the orchards of the Wenatchee and Yakima
valleys and elsewhere.
Suddenly the scale insects in other parts of the country
seemed to have got the same idea: it was not necessary for them
to die under the sprayings of lime sulfur, diligently and liberally
applied by orchardists. roughout much of the Midwest
thousands of acres of fine orchards were destroyed by insects now
impervious to spraying.
en in California the time-honored method of placing
canvas tents over trees and fumigating them with hydrocyanic
acid began to yield disappointing results in certain areas, a
problem that led to research at the California Citrus Experiment
Station, beginning about  and continuing for a quarter of a
century. Another insect to learn the profitable way of resistance
was the codling moth, or appleworm, in the s, although lead
arsenate had been used successfully against it for some  years.
But it was the advent of DDT and all its many relatives that
ushered in the true Age of Resistance. It need have surprised no
one with even the simplest knowledge of insects or of the
dynamics of animal populations that within a matter of a very few
years an ugly and dangerous problem had clearly defined itself.
Yet awareness of the fact that insects possess an effective
counterweapon to aggressive chemical attack seems to have
dawned slowly. Only those concerned with disease-carrying
insects seem by now to have been thoroughly aroused to the
alarming nature of the situation; the agriculturists still for the
most part blithely put their faith in the development of new and
ever more toxic chemicals, although the present difficulties have
been born of just such specious reasoning.
If understanding of the phenomenon of insect resistance
developed slowly, it was far otherwise with resistance itself.
Before  only about a dozen species were known to have
developed resistance to any of the pre-DDT insecticides. With the
new organic chemicals and new methods for their intensive
application, resistance began a meteoric rise that reached the
alarming level of  species in . No one believes the end is
in sight. More than  technical papers have now been
published on the subject. e World Health Organization has
enlisted the aid of some  scientists in all pans of the world,
declaring that resistance is at present the most important single
problem facing vector-control programmes. A distinguished
British student of animal populations, Dr. Charles Elton, has said,
We are hearing the early rumblings of what may become an
avalanche in strength.
Sometimes resistance develops so rapidly that the ink is
scarcely dry on a report hailing successful control of a species with
some specified chemical when an amended report has to be
issued. In South Africa, for example, cattlemen had long been
plagued by the blue tick, from which, on one ranch alone,
head of cattle had died in one year. e tick had for some years
been resistant to arsenical dips. en benzene hexachloride was
tried, and for a very short time all seemed to be well. Reports
issued early in the year  declared that the arsenic-resistant
ticks could be controlled readily with the new chemical; later in
the same year, a bleak notice of developing resistance had to be
published. e situation prompted a writer in the Leather Trades
Review to comment in : News such as this quietly trickling
through scientific circles and appearing in small sections of the
overseas press is enough to make headlines as big as those
concerning the new atomic bomb if only the significance of the
matter were properly understood.
Although insect resistance is a matter of concern in
agriculture and forestry, it is in the field of public health that the
most serious apprehensions have been felt. e relation between
various insects and many diseases of man is an ancient one.
Mosquitoes of the genus Anopheles may inject into the human
bloodstream the single-celled organism of malaria. Other
mosquitoes transmit yellow fever. Still others carry encephalitis.
e housefly, which does not bite, nevertheless by contact may
contaminate human food with the bacillus of dysentery, and in
many parts of the world may play an important part in the
transmission of eye diseases. e list of diseases and their insect
carriers, or vectors, includes typhus and body lice, plague and rat
fleas, African sleeping sickness and tsetse flies, various fevers and
ticks, and innumerable others.
ese are important problems and must be met. No
responsible person contends that insect-borne disease should be
ignored. e question that has now urgently presented itself is
whether it is either wise or responsible to attack the problem by
methods that are rapidly making it worse. e world has heard
much of the triumphant war against disease through the control
of insect vectors of infection, but it has heard little of the other
side of the storythe defeats, the short-lived triumphs that now
strongly support the alarming view that the insect enemy has
been made actually stronger by our efforts. Even worse, we may
have destroyed our very means of fighting.
A distinguished Canadian entomologist, Dr. A. W. A. Brown,
was engaged by the World Health Organization to make a
comprehensive survey of the resistance problem. In the resulting
monograph, published in , Dr. Brown has this to say: Barely
a decade after the introduction of the potent synthetic
insecticides in public health programmes, the main technical
problem is the development of resistance to them by the insects
they formerly controlled. In publishing his monograph, the
World Health Organization warned that the vigorous offensive
now being pursued against arthropod-borne diseases such as
malaria, typhus fever, and plague risks a serious setback unless
this new problem can be rapidly mastered.
What is the measure of this setback? e list of resistant
species now includes practically all of the insect groups of medical
importance. Apparently the blackflies, sand flies, and tsetse flies
have not yet become resistant to chemicals. On the other hand,
resistance among houseflies and body lice has now developed on
a global scale. Malaria programs are threatened by resistance
among mosquitoes. e oriental rat flea, the principal vector of
plague, has recently demonstrated resistance to DDT, a most
serious development. Countries reporting resistance among a
large number of other species represent every continent and most
of the island groups.
Probably the first medical use of modern insecticides
occurred in Italy in  when the Allied Military Government
launched a successful attack on typhus by dusting enormous
numbers of people with DDT. is was followed two years later
by extensive application of residual sprays for the control of
malaria mosquitoes. Only a year later the first signs of trouble
appeared. Both houseflies and mosquitoes of the genus Culex
began to show resistance to the sprays. In  a new chemical,
chlordane, was tried as a supplement to DDT. is time good
control was obtained for two years, but by August of
chlordane-resistant flies appeared, and by the end of that year all
of the houseflies as well as the Culex mosquitoes seemed to be
resistant to chlordane. As rapidly as new chemicals were brought
into use, resistance developed. By the end of , DDT,
methoxychlor, chlordane, heptachlor, and benzene hexachloride
had joined the list of chemicals no longer effective. e flies,
meanwhile, had become fantastically abundant.
e same cycle of events was being repeated in Sardinia
during the late s. In Denmark, products containing DDT
were first used in ; by  fly control had failed in many
places. In some areas of Egypt, flies had already become resistant
to DDT by ; BHC was substituted but was effective for less
than a year. One Egyptian village in particular symbolizes the
problem. Insecticides gave good control of flies in  and
during this same year the infant mortality rate was reduced by
nearly  per cent. e next year, nevertheless, flies were resistant
to DDT and chlordane. e fly population returned to its former
level; so did infant mortality.
In the United States, DDT resistance among flies had become
widespread in the Tennessee Valley by . Other areas
followed. Attempts to restore control with dieldrin met with little
success, for in some places the flies developed strong resistance
to this chemical within only two months. After running through
all the available chlorinated hydrocarbons, control agencies
turned to the organic phosphates, but here again the story of
resistance was repeated. e present conclusion of experts is that
housefly control has escaped insecticidal techniques and once
more must be based on general sanitation.
e control of body lice in Naples was one of the earliest and
most publicized achievements of DDT. During the next few years
its success in Italy was matched by the successful control of lice
affecting some two million people in Japan and Korea in the
winter of -. Some premonition of trouble ahead might
have been gained by the failure to control a typhus epidemic in
Spain in . Despite this failure in actual practice, encouraging
laboratory experiments led entomologists to believe lice were
unlikely to develop resistance. Events in Korea in the winter of
- were therefore startling. When DDT powder was applied
to a group of Korean soldiers the extraordinary result was an
actual increase in the infestation of lice. When lice were collected
and tested, it was found that  per cent DDT powder caused no
increase in their natural mortality rate. Similar results among lice
collected from vagrants in Tokyo, from an asylum in Itabashi, and
from refugee camps in Syria, Jordan, and eastern Egypt,
confirmed the ineffectiveness of DDT for the control of lice and
typhus. When by  the list of countries in which lice had
become resistant to DDT was extended to include Iran, Turkey,
Ethiopia, West Africa, South Africa, Peru, Chile, France,
Yugoslavia, Afghanistan, Uganda, Mexico, and Tanganyika, the
initial triumph in Italy seemed dim indeed.
e first malaria mosquito to develop resistance to DDT was
Anopheles sacharovi in Greece. Extensive spraying was begun in
with early success; by , however, observers noticed that
adult mosquitoes were resting in large numbers under road
bridges, although they were absent from houses and stables that
had been treated. Soon this habit of outside resting was extended
to caves, outbuildings, and culverts and to the foliage and trunks
of orange trees. Apparently the adult mosquitoes had become
sufficiently tolerant of DDT to escape from sprayed buildings and
rest and recover in the open. A few months later they were able
to remain in houses, where they were found resting on treated
walls.
is was a portent of the extremely serious situation that has
now developed. Resistance to insecticides by mosquitoes of the
anophelene group has surged upward at an astounding rate, being
created by the thoroughness of the very house-spraying programs
designed to eliminate malaria. In , only  species of these
mosquitoes displayed resistance; by early  the number had
risen from  to ! e number includes very dangerous malaria
vectors in West Africa, the Middle East, Central America,
Indonesia, and the eastern European region.
Among other mosquitoes, including carriers of other diseases,
the pattern is being repeated. A tropical mosquito that carries
parasites responsible for such diseases as elephantiasis has
become strongly resistant in many parts of the world. In some
areas of the United States the mosquito vector of western equine
en cephalitis has developed resistance. An even more serious
problem concerns the vector of yellow fever, for centuries one of
the great plagues of the world. Insecticide-resistant strains of this
mosquito have occurred in Southeast Asia and are now common
in the Caribbean region.
e consequences of resistance in terms of malaria and other
diseases are indicated by reports from many parts of the world.
An outbreak of yellow fever in Trinidad in  followed failure
to control the vector mosquito because of resistance. ere has
been a flare-up of malaria in Indonesia and Iran. In Greece,
Nigeria, and Liberia the mosquitoes continue to harbor and
transmit the malaria parasite. A reduction of diarrheal disease
achieved in Georgia through fly control was wiped out within
about a year. e reduction in acute conjunctivitis in Egypt, also
attained through temporary fly control, did not last beyond .
Less serious in terms of human health, but vexatious as man
measures economic values, is the fact that salt-marsh mosquitoes
in Florida also are showing resistance. Although these are not
vectors of disease, their presence in bloodthirsty swarms had
rendered large areas of coastal Florida uninhabitable until
controlof an uneasy and temporary naturewas established.
But this was quickly lost.
e ordinary house mosquito is here and there developing
resistance, a fact that should give pause to many communities
that now regularly arrange for wholesale spraying. is species is
now resistant to several insecticides, among which is the almost
universally used DDT, in Italy, Israel, Japan, France, and parts of
the United States, including California, Ohio, New Jersey, and
Massachusetts.
Ticks are another problem. e woodtick, vector of spotted
fever, has recently developed resistance; in the brown dog tick the
ability to escape a chemical death has long been thoroughly and
widely established. is poses problems for human beings as well
as for dogs. e brown dog tick is a semitropical species and when
it occurs as far north as New Jersey it must live over winter in
heated buildings rather than out of doors. John C. Pallister of the
American Museum of Natural History reported in the summer of
that his department had been getting a number of calls from
neighboring apartments on Central Park West. Every now and
then, Mr. Pallister said, a whole apartment house gets infested
with young ticks, and theyre hard to get rid of. A dog will pick up
ticks in Central Park, and then the ticks lay eggs and they hatch
in the apartment. ey seem immune to DDT or chlordane or
most of our modern sprays. It used to be very unusual to have
ticks in New York City, but now theyre all over here and on Long
Island, in Westchester and on up into Connecticut. Weve noticed
this particularly in the past five or six years.
e German cockroach throughout much of North America
has become resistant to chlordane, once the favorite weapon of
exterminators who have now turned to the organic phosphates.
However, the recent development of resistance to these
insecticides confronts the exterminators with the problem of
where to go next.
Agencies concerned with vector-borne disease are at present
coping with their problems by switching from one insecticide to
another as resistance develops. But this cannot go on indefinitely, despite the ingenuity of the chemists in supplying new materials.
Dr. Brown has pointed out that we are traveling a one-way
street. No one knows how long the street is. If the dead end is
reached before control of disease-carrying insects is achieved, our
situation will indeed be critical.
With insects that infest crops the story is the same.
To the list of about a dozen agricultural insects showing
resistance to the inorganic chemicals of an earlier era there is now
added a host of others resistant to DDT, BHC, lindane,
toxaphene, dieldrin, aldrin, and even to the phosphates from
which so much was hoped. e total number of resistant species
among crop-destroying insects had reached  in  .
e first cases of DDT resistance among agricultural insects
appeared in the United States in , about six years after its first
use. Perhaps the most troublesome situation concerns the codling
moth, which is now resistant to DDT in practically all of the
worlds apple-growing regions. Resistance in cabbage insects is
creating another serious problem. Potato insects are escaping
chemical control in many sections of the United States. Six
species of cotton insects, along with an assortment of thrips, fruit
moths, leaf hoppers, caterpillars, mites, aphids, wireworms, and
many others now are able to ignore the farmers assault with
chemical sprays.
e chemical industry is perhaps understandably loath to face
up to the unpleasant fact of resistance. Even in , with more
than  major insect species showing definite resistance to
chemicals, one of the leading journals in the field of agricultural
chemistry spoke of real or imagined insect resistance. Yet
hopefully as the industry may turn its face the other way, the
problem simply does not go away, and it presents some
unpleasant economic facts. One is that the cost of insect control
by chemicals is increasing steadily. It is no longer possible to
stockpile materials well in advance; what today may be the most
promising of insecticidal chemicals may be the dismal failure of
tomorrow. e very substantial financial investment involved in
backing and launching an insecticide may be swept away as the
insects prove once more that the effective approach to nature is
not through brute force. And however rapidly technology may
invent new uses for insecticides and new ways of applying them,
it is likely to find the insects keeping a lap ahead.
Darwin himself could scarcely have found a better example of
the operation of natural selection than is provided by the way the
mechanism of resistance operates. Out of an original population,
the members of which vary greatly in qualities of structure,
behavior, or physiology, it is the tough insects that survive
chemical attack. Spraying kills off the weaklings. e only
survivors are insects that have some inherent quality that allows
them to escape harm. ese are the parents of the new generation,
which, by simple inheritance, possesses all the qualities of
toughness inherent in its forebears. Inevitably it follows that
intensive spraying with powerful chemicals only makes worse the
problem it is designed to solve. After a few generations, instead of
a mixed population of strong and weak insects, there results a
population consisting entirely of tough, resistant strains.
e means by which insects resist chemicals probably vary
and as yet are not thoroughly understood. Some of the insects that
defy chemical control are thought to be aided by a structural
advantage, but there seems to be little actual proof of this. at
immunity exists in some strains is clear, however, from
observations like those of Dr. Briejer, who reports watching flies
at the Pest Control Institute at Springforbi, Denmark, disporting
themselves in DDT as much at home as primitive sorcerers
cavorting over red-hot coals.
Similar reports come from other parts of the world. In Malaya,
at Kuala Lumpur, mosquitoes at first reacted to DDT by leaving
the treated interiors. As resistance developed, however, they
could be found at rest on surfaces where the deposit of DDT
beneath them was clearly visible by torchlight. And in an army
camp in southern Taiwan samples of resistant bedbugs were
found actually carrying a deposit of DDT powder on their bodies.
When these bedbugs were experimentally placed in cloth
impregnated with DDT, they lived for as long as a month; they
proceeded to lay their eggs; and the resulting young grew and
thrived.
Nevertheless, the quality of resistance does not necessarily
depend on physical structure. DDT-resistant flies possess an
enzyme that allows them to detoxify the insecticide to the less
toxic chemical DDE. is enzyme occurs only in flies that possess
a genetic factor for DDT resistance. is factor is, of course,
hereditary. How flies and other insects detoxify the organic
phosphorus chemicals is less clearly understood.
Some behavioral habit may also place the insect out of reach
of chemicals. Many workers have noticed the tendency of
resistant flies to rest more on untreated horizontal surfaces than
on treated walls. Resistant houseflies may have the stable-fly habit
of sitting still in one place, thus greatly reducing the frequency of
their contact with residues of poison. Some malaria mosquitoes
have a habit that so reduces their exposure to DDT as to make
them virtually immune. Irritated by the spray, they leave the huts
and survive outside.
Ordinarily resistance takes two or three years to develop,
although occasionally it will do so in only one season, or even less.
At the other extreme it may take as long as six years. e number
of generations produced by an insect population in a year is
important, and this varies with species and climate. Flies in
Canada, for example, have been slower to develop resistance than
those in southern United States, where long hot summers favor a
rapid rate of reproduction.
e hopeful question is sometimes asked, If insects can
become resistant to chemicals, could human beings do the same
thing? eoretically they could; but since this would take
hundreds or even thousands of years, the comfort to those living
now is slight. Resistance is not something that develops in an
individual. If he possesses at birth some qualities that make him
less susceptible than others to poisons he is more likely to survive
and produce children. Resistance, therefore, is something that
develops in a population after time measured in several or many
generations. Human populations reproduce at the rate of roughly
three generations per century, but new insect generations arise in
a matter of days or weeks.
It is more sensible in some cases to rake a small amount of
damage in preference to having none for a time but paying for it
in the long run by losing the very means of fighting, is the advice
given in Holland by Dr. Briejer in his capacity as director of the
Plant Protection Service. Practical advice should be Spray as
little as you possibly can rather than Spray to the limit of your
capacity.Pressure on the pest population should always be as
slight as possible.
Unfortunately, such vision has not prevailed in the
corresponding agricultural services of the United States. e
Department of Agricultures Yearbook for , devoted entirely
to insects, recognizes the fact that insects become resistant but
says, More applications or greater quantities of the insecticides
are needed then for adequate control. e Department does not
say what will happen when the only chemicals left untried are
those that render the earth not only insectless but lifeless. But in
, only seven years after this advice was given, a Connecticut
entomologist was quoted in the Journal of Agricultural and Food
Chemistry to the effect that on at least one or two insect pests the
last available new material was then being used.
Dr. Briejer says:
It is more than clear that we are traveling a dangerous road.
We are going to have to do some very energetic research on other
control measures, measures that will have to be biological, not
chemical. Our aim should be to guide natural processes as
cautiously as possible in the desired direction rather than to use
brute force.
We need a more high-minded orientation and a deeper
insight, which I miss in many researchers. Life is a miracle beyond
our comprehension, and we should reverence it even where we
have to struggle against it. e resort to weapons such as
insecticides to control it is a proof of insufficient knowledge and
of an incapacity so to guide the processes of nature that brute
force becomes unnecessary. Humbleness is in order; there is no
excuse for scientific conceit here.
