WE STAND NOW where two roads diverge. But unlike the
roads in Robert Frosts familiar poem, they are not equally fair.
e road we have long been traveling is deceptively easy, a smooth
superhighway on which we progress with great speed, but at its
end lies disaster. e other fork of the roadthe one less traveled
byoffers our last, our only chance to reach a destination that
assures the preservation of our earth.
e choice, after all, is ours to make. If, having endured much,
we have at last asserted our right to know, and if, knowing, we
have concluded that we are being asked to take senseless and
frightening risks, then we should no longer accept the counsel of
those who tell us that we must fill our world with poisonous
chemicals; we should look about and see what other course is
open to us.
A truly extraordinary variety of alternatives to the chemical
control of insects is available. Some are already in use and have
achieved brilliant success. Others are in the stage of laboratory
testing. Still others are little more than ideas in the minds of
imaginative scientists, waiting for the opportunity to put them to
the test. All have this in common: they are biological solutions,
based on understanding of the living organisms they seek to
control, and of the whole fabric of life to which these organisms
belong. Specialists representing various areas of the vast field of
biology are contributingentomologists, pathologists,
geneticists, physiologists, biochemists, ecologistsall pouring
their knowledge and their creative inspirations into the formation
of a new science of biotic controls.
Any science may be likened to a river, says a Johns Hopkins
biologist, Professor Carl P. Swanson. It has its obscure and
unpretentious beginning; its quiet stretches as well as its rapids;
its periods of drought as well as of fullness. It gathers momentum
with the work of many investigators and as it is fed by other
streams of thought; it is deepened and broadened by the concepts
and generalizations that are gradually evolved.
So it is with the science of biological control in its modern
sense. In America it had its obscure beginnings a century ago with
the first attempts to introduce natural enemies of insects that
were proving troublesome to farmers, an effort that sometimes
moved slowly or not at all, but now and again gathered speed and
momentum under the impetus of an outstanding success. It had
its period of drought when workers in applied entomology,
dazzled by the spectacular new insecticides of the s, turned
their backs on all biological methods and set foot on the
treadmill of chemical control. But the goal of an insect-free
world continued to recede. Now at last, as it has become apparent
that the heedless and unrestrained use of chemicals is a greater
menace to ourselves than to the targets, the river which is the
science of biotic control flows again, fed by new streams of
thought.
Some of the most fascinating of the new methods are those
that seek to turn the strength of a species against itselfto use the
drive of an insects life forces to destroy it. e most spectacular
of these approaches is the male sterilization technique
developed by the chief of the United States Department of
Agricultures Entomology Research Branch, Dr. Edward Knipling,
and his associates.
About a quarter of a century ago Dr. Knipling startled his
colleagues by proposing a unique method of insect control. If it
were possible to sterilize and release large numbers of insects, he
theorized, the sterilized males would, under certain conditions,
compete with the normal wild males so successfully that, after
repeated releases, only infertile eggs would be produced and the
population would die out.
e proposal was met with bureaucratic inertia and with
skepticism from scientists, but the idea persisted in Dr. Kniplings
mind. One major problem remained to be solved before it could
be put to the testa practical method of insect sterilization had
to be found. Academically, the fact that insects could be sterilized
by exposure to X-ray had been known since , when an
entomologist by the name of G. A. Runner reported such
sterilization of cigarette beetles. Hermann Mullers pioneering
work on the production of mutations by X-ray opened up vast
new areas of thought in the late s, and by the middle of the
century various workers had reported the sterilization by X-rays
or gamma rays of at least a dozen species of insects.
But these were laboratory experiments, still a long way from
practical application. About , Dr. Knipling launched a
serious effort to turn insect sterilization into a weapon that would
wipe out a major insect enemy of livestock in the South, the
screw-worm fly. e females of this species lay their eggs in any
open wound of a warm-blooded animal. e hatching larvae are
parasitic, feeding on the flesh of the host. A full-grown steer may
succumb to a heavy infestation in  days, and livestock losses in
the United States have been estimated at ,, a year. e
toll of wildlife is harder to measure, but it must be great. Scarcity
of deer in some areas of Texas is attributed to the screw-worm.
is is a tropical or subtropical insect, inhabiting South and
Central America and Mexico, and in the United States normally
restricted to the Southwest. About , however, it was
accidentally introduced into Florida, where the climate allowed it
to survive over winter and to establish populations. It even
pushed into southern Alabama and Georgia, and soon the
livestock industry of the southeastern states was faced with
annual losses running to ,,.
A vast amount of information on the biology of the screw-
worm had been accumulated over the years by Agriculture
Department scientists in Texas. By , after some preliminary
field trials on Florida islands, Dr. Knipling was ready for a full-
scale test of his theory. For this, by arrangement with the Dutch
Government, he went to the island of Curacao in the Caribbean,
cut off from the mainland by at least  miles of sea.
Beginning in August , screw-worms reared and sterilized
in an Agriculture Department laboratory in Florida were flown to
Curacao and released from airplanes at the rate of about  per
square mile per week. Almost at once the number of egg masses
deposited on experimental goats began to decrease, as did their
fertility. Only seven weeks after the releases were started, all eggs
were infertile. Soon it was impossible to find a single egg mass,
sterile or otherwise. e screw-worm had indeed been eradicated
on Curacao.
e resounding success of the Curacao experiment whetted
the appetites of Florida livestock raisers for a similar feat that
would relieve them of the scourge of screw-worms. Although the
difficulties here were relatively enormousan area  times as
large as the small Caribbean islandin  the United States
Department of Agriculture and the State of Florida joined in
providing funds for an eradication effort. e project involved the
weekly production of about  million screw-worms at a specially
constructed fly factory, the use of  light airplanes to fly pre-
arranged flight patterns, five to six hours daily, each plane
carrying a thousand paper cartons, each carton containing  to
irradiated flies.
e cold winter of -, when freezing temperatures
gripped northern Florida, gave an unexpected opportunity to
start the program while the screw-worm populations were
reduced and confined to a small area. By the time the program
was considered complete at the end of  months,  billion
artificially reared, sterilized flies had been released over Florida
and sections of Georgia and Alabama. e last-known animal
wound infestation that could be attributed to screw-worms
occurred in February . In the next few weeks several adults
were taken in traps. ereafter no trace of the screw-worm could
be discovered. Its extinction in the Southeast had been
accomplisheda triumphant demonstration of the worth of
scientific creativity, aided by thorough basic research,
persistence, and determination.
Now a quarantine barrier in Mississippi seeks to prevent the
re-entrance of the screw-worm from the Southwest, where it is
firmly entrenched. Eradication there would be a formidable
undertaking, considering the vast areas involved and the
probability of re-invasion from Mexico. Nevertheless, the stakes
are high and the thinking in the Department seems to be that
some sort of program, designed at least to hold the screw-worm
populations at very low levels, may soon be attempted in Texas
and other infested areas of the Southwest.
e brilliant success of the screw-worm campaign has
stimulated tremendous interest in applying the same methods to
other insects. Not all, of course, are suitable subjects for this
technique, much depending on details of the life history,
population density, and reactions to radiation.
Experiments have been undertaken by the British in the hope
that the method could be used against the tsetse fly in Rhodesia.
is insect infests about a third of Africa, posing a menace to
human health and preventing the keeping of livestock in an area
of some / million square miles of wooded grasslands. e
habits of the tsetse differ considerably from those of the screw-
worm fly, and although it can be sterilized by radiation some
technical difficulties remain to be worked out before the method
can be applied.
e British have already tested a large number of other species
for susceptibility to radiation. United States scientists have had
some encouraging early results with the melon fly and the oriental
and Mediterranean fruit flies in laboratory tests in Hawaii and
field tests on the remote island of Rota. e corn borer and the
sugarcane borer are also being tested. ere are possibilities, too,
that insects of medical importance might be controlled by
sterilization. A Chilean scientist has pointed out that malaria-
carrying mosquitoes persist in his country in spite of insecticide
treatment; the release of sterile males might then provide the final
blow needed to eliminate this population.
e obvious difficulties of sterilizing by radiation have led to
search for an easier method of accomplishing similar results, and
there is now a strongly running tide of interest in chemical
sterilants.
Scientists at the Department of Agriculture laboratory in
Orlando, Florida, are now sterilizing the housefly in laboratory
experiments and even in some field trials, using chemicals
incorporated in suitable foods. In a test on an island in the Florida
Keys in , a population of flies was nearly wiped out within a
period of only five weeks. Repopulation of course followed from
nearby islands, but as a pilot project the test was successful. e
Departments excitement about the promise of this method is
easily understood. In the first place, as we have seen, the housefly
has now become virtually uncontrollable by insecticides. A
completely new method of control is undoubtedly needed. One of
the problems of sterilization by radiation is that this requires not
only artificial rearing but the release of sterile males in larger
number than are present in the wild population. is could be
done with the screw-worm, which is actually not an abundant
insect. With the housefly, however, more than doubling the
population through releases could be highly objectionable, even
though the increase would be only temporary. A chemical
sterilant, on the other hand, could be combined with a bait
substance and introduced into the natural environment of the fly;
insects feeding on it would become sterile and in the course of
time the sterile flies would predominate and the insects would
breed themselves out of existence.
e testing of chemicals for a sterilizing effect is much more
difficult than the testing of chemical poisons. It takes  days to
evaluate one chemicalalthough, of course, a number of tests can
be run concurrently. Yet between April  and December
several hundred chemicals were screened at the Orlando
laboratory for a possible sterilizing effect. e Department of
Agriculture seems happy to have found among these even a
handful of chemicals that show promise.
Now other laboratories of the Department are taking up the
problem, testing chemicals against stable flies, mosquitoes, boll
weevils, and an assortment of fruit flies. All this is presently
experimental but in the few years since work began on
chemosterilants the project has grown enormously. In theory it
has many attractive features. Dr. Knipling has pointed out that
effective chemical insect sterilization might easily outdo some of
the best of known insecticides. Take an imaginary situation in
which a population of a million insects is multiplying five times in
each generation. An insecticide might kill  per cent of each
generation, leaving , insects alive after the third
generation. In contrast, a chemical that would produce  per
cent sterility would leave only  insects alive.
On the other side of the coin is the fact that some extremely
potent chemicals are involved. It is fortunate that at least during
these early stages most of the men working with chemosterilants
seem mindful of the need to find safe chemicals and safe methods
of application. Nonetheless, suggestions are heard here and there
that these sterilizing chemicals might be applied as aerial sprays
for example, to coat the foliage chewed by gypsy moth larvae. To
attempt any such procedure without thorough advance research
on the hazards involved would be the height of irresponsibility. If
the potential hazards of the chemosterilants are not constantly
borne in mind we could easily find ourselves in even worse
trouble than that now created by the insecticides.
e sterilants currently being tested fall generally into two
groups, both of which are extremely interesting in their mode of
action. e first are intimately related to the life processes, or
metabolism, of the cell; i.e., they so closely resemble a substance
the cell or tissue needs that the organism mistakes them for the
true metabolite and tries to incorporate them in its normal
building processes. But the fit is wrong in some detail and the
process comes to a halt. Such chemicals are called
antimetabolites.
e second group consists of chemicals that act on the
chromosomes, probably affecting the gene chemicals and causing
the chromosomes to break up. e chemosterilants of this group
are alkylating agents, which are extremely reactive chemicals,
capable of intense cell destruction, damage to chromo somes, and
production of mutations. It is the view of Dr. Peter Alexander of
the Chester Beatty Research Institute in London that any
alkylating agent which is effective in sterilizing insects would also
be a powerful mutagen and carcinogen. Dr. Alexander feels that
any conceivable use of such chemicals in insect control would be
open to the most severe objections. It is to be hoped, therefore,
that the present experiments will lead not to actual use of these
particular chemicals but to the discovery of others that will be safe
and also highly specific in their action on the target insect.
Some of the most interesting of the recent work is concerned
with still other ways of forging weapons from the insects own life
processes. Insects produce a variety of venoms, attractants,
repellants. What is the chemical nature of these secretions? Could
we make use of them as, perhaps, very selective insecticides?
Scientists at Cornell University and elsewhere are trying to find
answers to some of these questions, studying the defense
mechanisms by which many insects protect themselves from
attack by predators, working out the chemical structure of insect
secretions. Other scientists are working on the so-called juvenile
hormone, a powerful substance which prevents metamorphosis
of the larval insect until the proper stage of growth has been
reached.
Perhaps the most immediately useful result of this exploration
of insect secretion is the development of lures, or attractants.
Here again, nature has pointed the way. e gypsy moth is an
especially intriguing example. e female moth is too heavy-
bodied to fly. She lives on or near the ground, fluttering about
among low vegetation or creeping up tree trunks. e male, on
the contrary, is a strong flier and is attracted even from
considerable distances by a scent released by the female from
special glands. Entomologists have taken advantage of this fact for
a good many years, laboriously preparing this sex attractant from
the bodies of the female moths. It was then used in traps set for
the males in census operations along the fringe of the insects
range. But this was an extremely expensive procedure. Despite
the much publicized infestations in the northeastern states, there
were not enough gypsy moths to provide the material, and hand-
collected female pupae had to be imported from Europe,
sometimes at a cost of half a dollar per tip. It was a tremendous
breakthrough, therefore, when, after years of effort, chemists of
the Agriculture Department recently succeeded in isolating the
attractant. Following upon this discovery was the successful
preparation of a closely related synthetic material from a
constituent of castor oil; this not only deceives the male moths
but is apparently fully as attractive as the natural substance. As
little as one microgram (/,, gram) in a trap is an effective
lure.
All this is of much more than academic interest, for the new
and economical gyplure might be used not merely in census
operations but in control work. Several of the more attractive
possibilities are now being tested. In what might be termed an
experiment in psychological warfare, the attractant is combined
with a granular material and distributed by planes. e aim is to
confuse the male moth and alter the normal behavior so that, in
the welter of attractive scents, he cannot find the true scent trail
leading to the female. is line of attack is being carried even
further in experiments aimed at deceiving the male into
attempting to mate with a spurious female. In the laboratory,
male gypsy moths have attempted copulation with chips of wood,
vermiculite, and other small, inanimate objects, so long as they
were suitably impregnated with gyplure. Whether such diversion
of the mating instinct into nonproductive channels would
actually serve to reduce the population remains to be tested, but
it is an interesting possibility.
e gypsy moth lure was the first insect sex attractant to be
synthesized, but probably there will soon be others. A number of
agricultural insects are being studied for possible attractants that
man could imitate. Encouraging results have been obtained with
the Hessian fly and the tobacco hornworm.
Combinations of attractants and poisons are being tried
against several insect species. Government scientists have
developed an attractant called methyl-eugenol, which males of
the oriental fruit fly and the melon fly find irresistible. is has
been combined with a poison in tests in the Bonin Islands
miles south of Japan. Small pieces of fiberboard were impregnated
with the two chemicals and were distributed by air over the entire
island chain to attract and kill the male flies. is program of
male annihilation was begun in : a year later the
Agriculture Department estimated that more than  per cent of
the population had been eliminated. e method as here applied
seems to have marked advantages over the conventional
broadcasting of insecticides. e poison, an organic phosphorus
chemical, is confined to squares of fiberboard which are unlikely
to be eaten by wildlife; its residues, moreover, are quickly
dissipated and so are not potential contaminants of soil or water.
But not all communication in the insect world is by scents that
lure or repel. Sound also may be a warning or an attraction. e
constant stream of ultrasonic sound that issues from a bat in flight
(serving as a radar system to guide it through darkness) is heard
by certain moths, enabling them to avoid capture. e wing
sounds of approaching parasitic flies warn the larvae of some
sawflies to herd together for protection. On the other hand, the
sounds made by certain wood-boring insects enable their
parasites to find them, and to the male mosquito the wing-beat of
the female is a siren song.
What use, if any, can be made of this ability of the insect to
detect and react to sound? As yet in the experimental stage, but
nonetheless interesting, is the initial success in attracting male
mosquitoes to playback recordings of the flight sound of the
female. e males were lured to a charged grid and so killed. e
repellant effect of bursts of ultrasonic sound is being tested in
Canada against corn borer and cutworm moths. Two authorities
on animal sound, Professors Hubert and Mable Frings of the
University of Hawaii, believe that a field method of influencing
the behavior of insects with sound only awaits discovery of the
proper key to unlock and apply the vast existing knowledge of
insect sound production and reception. Repellant sounds may
offer greater possibilities than attractants. e Fringses are
known for their discovery that starlings scatter in alarm before a
recording of the distress cry of one of their fellows; perhaps
somewhere in this fact is a central truth that may be applied to
insects. To practical men of industry the possibilities seem real
enough so that at least one major electronic corporation is
preparing to set up a laboratory to test them.
Sound is also being tested as an agent of direct destruction.
Ultrasonic sound will kill all mosquito larvae in a laboratory tank;
however, it kills other aquatic organisms as well. In other
experiments, blowflies, mealworms, and yellow fever mosquitoes
have been killed by airborne ultrasonic sound in a matter of
seconds. All such experiments are first steps toward wholly new
concepts of insect control which the miracles of electronics may
some day make a reality.
e new biotic control of insects is not wholly a matter of
electronics and gamma radiation and other products of mans
inventive mind. Some of its methods have ancient roots, based on
the knowledge that, like ourselves, insects are subject to disease.
Bacterial infections sweep through their populations like the
plagues of old; under the onset of a virus their hordes sicken and
die. e occurrence of disease in insects was known before the
time of Aristotle; the maladies of the silkworm were celebrated in
medieval poetry; and through study of the diseases of this same
insect the first understanding of the principles of infectious
disease came to Pasteur.
Insects are beset not only by viruses and bacteria but also by
fungi, protozoa, microscopic worms, and other beings from all
that unseen world of minute life that, by and large, befriends
mankind. For the microbes include not only disease organisms
but those that destroy waste matter, make soils fertile, and enter
into countless biological processes like fermentation and
nitrification. Why should they not also aid us in the control of
insects?
One of the first to envision such use of microorganisms was
the th-century zoologist Elie Metchnikoff. During the
concluding decades of the th and the first half of the th
centuries the idea of microbial control was slowly taking form.
e first conclusive proof that an insect could be brought under
control by introducing a disease into its environment came in the
late s with the discovery and use of milky disease for the
Japanese beetle, which is caused by the spores of a bacterium
belonging to the genus Bacillus. is classic example of bacterial
control has a long history of use in the eastern part of the United
States, as I have pointed out in Chapter .
High hopes now attend tests of another bacterium of this
genus Bacillus thuringiensis originally discovered in
Germany in  in the province of uringia, where it was found
to cause a fatal septicemia in the larvae of the flour moth. is
bacterium actually kills by poisoning rather than by disease.
Within its vegetative rods there are formed, along with spores,
peculiar crystals composed of a protein substance highly toxic to
certain insects, especially to the larvae of the mothlike
lepidopteras. Shortly after eating foliage coated with this toxin the
larva suffers paralysis, stops feeding, and soon dies. For practical
purposes, the fact that feeding is interrupted promptly is of course
an enormous advantage, for crop damage stops almost as soon as
the pathogen is applied. Compounds containing spores of
Bacillus thuringiensis are now being manufactured by several
firms in the United States under various trade names. Field tests
are being made in several countries: in France and Germany
against larvae of the cabbage butterfly, in Yugoslavia against the
fall webworm, in the Soviet Union against a tent caterpillar. In
Panama, where tests were begun in , this bacterial insecticide
may be the answer to one or more of the serious problems
confronting banana growers. ere the root borer is a serious pest
of the banana, so weakening its roots that the trees are easily
toppled by wind. Dieldrin has been the only chemical effective
against the borer, but it has now set in motion a chain of disaster.
e borers are becoming resistant. e chemical has also
destroyed some important insect predators and so has caused an
increase in the tortricidssmall, stout-bodied moths whose
larvae scar the surface of the bananas. ere is reason to hope the
new microbial insecticide will eliminate both the tortricids and
the borers and that it will do so without upsetting natural
controls.
In eastern forests of Canada and the United States bacterial
insecticides may be one important answer to the problems of such
forest insects as the budworms and the gypsy moth. In  both
countries began field tests with a commercial preparation of
Bacillus thuringiensis. Some of the early results have been
encouraging. In Vermont, for example, the end results of bacterial
control were as good as those obtained with DDT. e main
technical problem now is to find a carrying solution that will stick
the bacterial spores to the needles of the evergreens. On crops this
is not a problemeven a dust can be used. Bacterial insecticides
have already been tried on a wide variety of vegetables, especially
in California.
Meanwhile, other perhaps less spectacular work is concerned
with viruses. Here and there in California fields of young alfalfa
are being sprayed with a substance as deadly as any insecticide for
the destructive alfalfa caterpillara solution containing a virus
obtained from the bodies of caterpillars that have died because of
infection with this exceedingly virulent disease. e bodies of only
five diseased caterpillars provide enough virus to treat an acre of
alfalfa. In some Canadian forests a virus that affects pine sawflies
has proved so effective in control that it has replaced insecticides.
Scientists in Czechoslovakia are experimenting with
protozoa against webworms and other insect pests, and in the
United States a protozoan parasite has been found to reduce the
egg-laying potential of the corn borer.
To some the term microbial insecticide may conjure up
pictures of bacterial warfare that would endanger other forms of
life. is is not true. In contrast to chemicals, insect pathogens are
harmless to all but their intended targets. Dr. Edward Steinhaus,
an outstanding authority on insect pathology, has stated
emphatically that there is no authenticated recorded instance of
a true insect pathogen having caused an infectious disease in a
vertebrate animal either experimentally or in nature. e insect
pathogens are so specific that they infect only a small group of
insectssometimes a single species. Biologically they do not
belong to the type of organisms that cause disease in higher
animals or in plants. Also, as Dr. Steinhaus points out, outbreaks
of insect disease in nature always remain confined to insects,
affecting neither the host plants nor animals feeding on them.
Insects have many natural enemiesnot only microbes of
many kinds but other insects. e first suggestion that an insect
might be controlled by encouraging its enemies is generally
credited to Erasmus Darwin about . Probably because it was
the first generally practiced method of biological control, this
setting of one insect against another is widely but erroneously
thought to be the only alternative to chemicals.
In the United States the true beginnings of conventional
biological control date from  when Albert Koebele, the first
of a growing army of entomologist explorers, went to Australia to
search for natural enemies of the cottony cushion scale that
threatened the California citrus industry with destruction. As we
have seen in Chapter , the mission was crowned with
spectacular success, and in the century that followed the world
has been combed for natural enemies to control the insects that
have come uninvited to our shores. In all, about  species of
imported predators and parasites have become established.
Besides the vedalia beetles brought in by Koebele, other
importations have been highly successful. A wasp imported from
Japan established complete control of an insect attacking eastern
apple orchards. Several natural enemies of the spotted alfalfa
aphid, an accidental import from the Middle East, are credited
with saving the California alfalfa industry. Parasites and predators
of the gypsy moth achieved good control, as did the Tiphia wasp
against the Japanese beetle. Biological control of scales and mealy
bugs is estimated to save California several millions of dollars a
yearindeed, one of the leading entomologists of that state, Dr.
Paul DeBach, has estimated that for an investment of ,,
in biological control work California has received a return of
,,.
Examples of successful biological control of serious pests by
importing their natural enemies are to be found in some
countries distributed over much of the world. e advantages of
such control over chemicals are obvious: it is relatively
inexpensive, it is permanent, it leaves no poisonous residues. Yet
biological control has suffered from lack of support. California is
virtually alone among the states in having a formal program in
biological control, and many states have not even one
entomologist who devotes full time to it. Perhaps for want of
support biological control through insect enemies has not always
been carried out with the scientific thoroughness it requires
exacting studies of its impact on the populations of insect prey
have seldom been made, and releases have not always been made
with the precision that might spell the difference between success
and failure.
e predator and the preyed upon exist not alone, but as part
of a vast web of life, all of which needs to be taken into account.
Perhaps the opportunities for the more conventional types of
biological control are greatest in the forests. e farmlands of
modern agriculture are highly artificial, unlike anything nature
ever conceived. But the forests are a different world, much closer
to natural environments. Here, with a minimum of help and a
maximum of noninterference from man, Nature can have her
way, setting up all that wonderful and intricate system of checks
and balances that protects the forest from undue damage by
insects.
In the United States our foresters seem to have thought of
biological control chiefly in terms of introducing insect parasites
and predators. e Canadians take a broader view, and some of
the Europeans have gone farthest of all to develop the science of
forest hygiene to an amazing extent. Birds, ants, forest spiders,
and soil bacteria are as much a part of a forest as the trees, in the
view of European foresters, who take care to inoculate a new
forest with these protective factors. e encouragement of birds
is one of the first steps. In the modern era of intensive forestry the
old hollow trees are gone and with them homes for woodpeckers
and other tree-nesting birds. is lack is met by nesting boxes,
which draw the birds back into the forest. Other boxes are
specially designed for owls and for bats, so that these creatures
may take over in the dark hours the work of insect hunting
performed in daylight by the small birds.
But this is only the beginning. Some of the most fascinating
control work in European forests employs the forest red ant as an
aggressive insect predatora species which, unfortunately, does
not occur in North America. About  years ago Professor Karl
Gosswald of the University of Wurzburg developed a method of
cultivating this ant and establishing colonies. Under his direction
more than , colonies of the red ant have been established in
about  test areas in the German Fed eral Republic. Dr.
Gosswalds method has been adopted in Italy and other countries,
where ant farms have been established to supply colonies for
distribution in the forests. In the Apennines, for example, several
hundred nests have been set out to protect reforested areas.
Where you can obtain in your forest a combination of birds
and ants protection together with some bats and owls, the
biological equilibrium has already been essentially improved,
says Dr. Heinz Ruppertshofen, a forestry officer in Molln,
Germany, who believes that a single introduced predator or
parasite is less effective than an array of the natural companions
of the trees.
New ant colonies in the forests at Molln are protected from
woodpeckers by wire netting to reduce the toll. In this way the
woodpeckers, which have increased by  per cent in  years in
some of the test areas, do not seriously reduce the ant colonies,
and pay handsomely for what they take by picking harmful
caterpillars off the trees. Much of the work of caring for the ant
colonies (and the birds nesting boxes as well) is assumed by a
youth corps from the local school, children  to  years old. e
costs are exceedingly low; the benefits amount to permanent
protection of the forests.
Another extremely interesting feature of Dr. Ruppertshofen^
work is his use of spiders, in which he appears to be a pioneer.
Although there is a large literature on the classification and
natural history of spiders, it is scattered and fragmentary and
deals not at all with their value as an agent of biological control.
Of the , known kinds of spiders,  are native to Germany
(and about  to the United States). Twenty-nine families of
spiders inhabit German forests.
To a forester the most important fact about a spider is the
kind of net it builds. e wheel-net spiders are most important,
for the webs of some of them are so narrow-meshed that they can
catch all flying insects. A large web (up to  inches in diameter)
of the cross spider bears some , adhesive nodules on its
strands. A single spider may destroy in her life of  months an
average of  insects. A biologically sound forest has  to
spiders to the square meter (a little more than a square yard).
Where there are fewer, the deficiency may be remedied by
collecting and distributing the baglike cocoons containing the
eggs. ree cocoons of the wasp spider [which occurs also in
America] yield a thousand spiders, which can catch , flying
insects, says Dr. Ruppertshofen. e tiny and delicate young of
the wheel-net spiders that emerge in the spring are especially
important, he says, as they spin in a teamwork a net umbrella
above the top shoots of the trees and thus protect the young
shoots against the flying insects. As the spiders molt and grow,
the net is enlarged.
Canadian biologists have pursued rather similar lines of
investigation, although with differences dictated by the fact that
North American forests are largely natural rather than planted,
and that the species available as aids in maintaining a healthy
forest are somewhat different. e emphasis in Canada is on small
mammals, which are amazingly effective in the control of certain
insects, especially those that live within the spongy soil of the
forest floor. Among such insects are the sawflies, so-called
because the female has a saw-shaped ovipositor with which she
slits open the needles of evergreen trees in order to deposit her
eggs. e larvae eventually drop to the ground and form cocoons
in the peat of tamarack bogs or the duff under spruce or pines.
But beneath the forest floor is a world honeycombed with the
tunnels and runways of small mammalswhitefooted mice,
voles, and shrews of various species. Of all these small burrowers,
the voracious shrews find and consume the largest number of
sawfly cocoons. ey feed by placing a forefoot on the cocoon and
biting off the end, showing an extraordinary ability to
discriminate between sound and empty cocoons. And for their
insatiable appetite the shrews have no rivals. Whereas a vole can
consume about  cocoons a day, a shrew, depend ing on the
species, may devour up to ! is may result, according to
laboratory tests, in destruction of  to  per cent of the cocoons
present.
It is not surprising that the island of Newfoundland, which
has no native shrews but is beset with saw flies, so eagerly desired
some of these small, efficient mammals that in  the
introduction of the masked shrewthe most efficient sawfly
predatorwas attempted. Canadian officials report in  that
the attempt has been successful. e shrews are multiplying and
are spreading out over the island, some marked individuals having
been recovered as much as ten miles from the point of release.
ere is, then, a whole battery of armaments available to the
forester who is willing to look for permanent solutions that
preserve and strengthen the natural relations in the forest.
Chemical pest control in the forest is at best a stopgap measure
bringing no real solution, at worst killing the fishes in the forest
streams, bringing on plagues of insects, and destroying the
natural controls and those we may be trying to introduce. By such
violent measures, says Dr. Ruppertshofen, the partnership for life
of the forest is entirely being unbalanced, and the catastrophes
caused by parasites repeat in shorter and shorter periods  We,
therefore, have to put an end to these unnatural manipulations
brought into the most important and almost last natural living
space which has been left for us.
rough all these new, imaginative, and creative approaches
to the problem of sharing our earth with other creatures there
runs a constant theme, the awareness that we are dealing with
lifewith living populations and all their pressures and
counterpressures, their surges and recessions. Only by taking
account of such life forces and by cautiously seeking to guide
them into channels favorable to ourselves can we hope to achieve
a reasonable accommodation between the insect hordes and
ourselves.
e current vogue for poisons has failed utterly to take into
account these most fundamental considerations. As crude a
weapon as the cave mans club, the chemical barrage has been
hurled against the fabric of lifea fabric on the one hand delicate
and destructible, on the other miraculously tough and resilient,
and capable of striking back in unexpected ways. ese
extraordinary capacities of life have been ignored by the
practitioners of chemical control who have brought to their task
no high-minded orientation, no humility before the vast forces
with which they tamper.
e control of nature is a phrase conceived in arrogance,
born of the Neanderthal age of biology and philosophy, when it
was supposed that nature exists for the convenience of man. e
concepts and practices of applied entomology for the most part
date from that Stone Age of science. It is our alarming misfortune
that so primitive a science has armed itself with the most modern
and terrible weapons, and that in turning them against the insects
it has also turned them against the earth.
