THE HISTORY OF LIFE on earth has been a history of
interaction between living things and their surroundings. To a
large extent, the physical form and the habits of the earths
vegetation and its animal life have been molded by the
environment. Considering the whole span of earthly time, the
opposite effect, in which life actually modifies its surroundings,
has been relatively slight. Only within the moment of time
represented by the present century has one speciesman
acquired significant power to alter the nature of his world.
During the past quarter century this power has not only
increased to one of disturbing magnitude but it has changed in
character. e most alarming of all mans assaults upon the
environment is the contamination of air, earth, rivers, and sea
with dangerous and even lethal materials. is pollution is for the
most part irrecoverable; the chain of evil it initiates not only in
the world that must support life but in living tissues is for the
most part irreversible. In this now universal contamination of the
environment, chemicals are the sinister and little-recognized
partners of radiation in changing the very nature of the world
the very nature of its life. Strontium , released through nuclear
explosions into the air, comes to earth in rain or drifts down as
fallout, lodges in soil, enters into the grass or corn or wheat grown
there, and in time takes up its abode in the bones of a human
being, there to remain until his death. Similarly, chemicals
sprayed on croplands or forests or gardens lie long in soil,
entering into living organisms, passing from one to another in a
chain of poisoning and death. Or they pass mysteriously by
underground streams until they emerge and, through the
alchemy of air and sunlight, combine into new forms that kill
vegetation, sicken cattle, and work unknown harm on those who
drink from once pure wells. As Albert Schweitzer has said, Man
can hardly even recognize the devils of his own creation.
It took hundreds of millions of years to produce the life that
now inhabits the eartheons of time in which that developing
and evolving and diversifying life reached a state of adjustment
and balance with its surroundings. e environment, rigorously
shaping and directing the life it supported, contained elements
that were hostile as well as supporting. Certain rocks gave out
dangerous radiation; even within the light of the sun, from which
all life draws its energy, there were short-wave radiations with
power to injure. Given timetime not in years but in millennia
life adjusts, and a balance has been reached. For time is the
essential ingredient; but in the modern world there is no time.
e rapidity of change and the speed with which new
situations are created follow the impetuous and heedless pace of
man rather than the deliberate pace of nature. Radiation is no
longer merely the background radiation of rocks, the
bombardment of cosmic rays, the ultraviolet of the sun that have
existed before there was any life on earth; radiation is now the
unnatural creation of mans tampering with the atom. e
chemicals to which life is asked to make its adjustment are no
longer merely the calcium and silica and copper and all the rest of
the minerals washed out of the rocks and carried in rivers to the
sea; they are the synthetic creations of mans inventive mind,
brewed in his laboratories, and having no counterparts in nature.
To adjust to these chemicals would require time on the scale
that is natures; it would require not merely the years of a mans
life but the life of generations. And even this, were it by some
miracle possible, would be futile, for the new chemicals come
from our laboratories in an endless stream; almost five hundred
annually find their way into actual use in the United States alone.
e figure is staggering and its implications are not easily
grasped new chemicals to which the bodies of men and
animals are required somehow to adapt each year, chemicals
totally outside the limits of biologic experience.
Among them are many that are used in mans war against
nature. Since the mid-s over  basic chemicals have been
created for use in killing insects, weeds, rodents, and other
organisms described in the modern vernacular as pests; and
they are sold under several thousand different brand names.
ese sprays, dusts, and aerosols are now applied almost
universally to farms, gardens, forests, and homesnonselective
chemicals that have the power to kill every insect, the good and
the bad, to still the song of birds and the leaping of fish in the
streams, to coat the leaves with a deadly film, and to linger on in
soilall this though the intended target may be only a few weeds
or insects. Can anyone believe it is possible to lay down such a
barrage of poisons on the surface of the earth without making it
unfit for all life? ey should not be called insecticides, but
biocides.
e whole process of spraying seems caught up in an endless
spiral. Since DDT was released for civilian use, a process of
escalation has been going on in which ever more toxic materials
must be found. is has happened because insects, in a
triumphant vindication of Darwins principle of the survival of the
fittest, have evolved super races immune to the particular
insecticide used, hence a deadlier one has always to be
developedand then a deadlier one than that. It has happened
also because, for reasons to be described later, destructive insects
often undergo a flareback, or resurgence, after spraying, in
numbers greater than before. us the chemical war is never won,
and all life is caught in its violent crossfire.
Along with the possibility of the extinction of mankind by
nuclear war, the central problem of our age has therefore become
the contamination of mans total environment with such
substances of incredible potential for harmsubstances that
accumulate in the tissues of plants and animals and even
penetrate the germ cells to shatter or alter the very material of
heredity upon which the shape of the future depends.
Some would-be architects of our future look toward a time
when it will be possible to alter the human germ plasm by design.
But we may easily be doing so now by inadvertence, for many
chemicals, like radiation, bring about gene mutations. It is ironic
to think that man might determine his own future by something
so seemingly trivial as the choice of an insect spray.
All this has been riskedfor what? Future historians may well
be amazed by our distorted sense of proportion. How could
intelligent beings seek to control a few unwanted species by a
method that contaminated the entire environment and brought
the threat of disease and death even to their own kind? Yet this is
precisely what we have done. We have done it, moreover, for
reasons that collapse the moment we examine them. We are told
that the enormous and expanding use of pesticides is necessary to
maintain farm production. Yet is our real problem not one of
overproduction? Our farms, despite measures to remove acreages
from production and to pay farmers not to produce, have yielded
such a staggering excess of crops that the American taxpayer in
is paying out more than one billion dollars a year as the total
carrying cost of the surplus-food storage program. And is the
situation helped when one branch of the Agriculture Department
tries to reduce production while another states, as it did in ,
It is believed generally that reduction of crop acreages under
provisions of the Soil Bank will stimulate interest in use of
chemicals to obtain maximum production on the land retained in
crops.
All this is not to say there is no insect problem and no need
of control. I am saying, rather, that control must be geared to
realities, not to mythical situations, and that the methods
employed must be such that they do not destroy us along with the
insects.
e problem whose attempted solution has brought such a
train of disaster in its wake is an accompaniment of our modern
way of life. Long before the age of man, insects inhabited the
eartha group of extraordinarily varied and adaptable beings.
Over the course of time since mans advent, a small percentage of
the more than half a million species of insects have come into
conflict with human welfare in two principal ways: as competitors
for the food supply and as carriers of human disease.
Disease-carrying insects become important where human
beings are crowded together, especially under conditions where
sanitation is poor, as in time of natural disaster or war or in
situations of extreme poverty and deprivation. en control of
some sort becomes necessary. It is a sobering fact, however, as we
shall presently see, that the method of massive chemical control
has had only limited success, and also threatens to worsen the
very conditions it is intended to curb.
Under primitive agricultural conditions the farmer had few
insect problems. ese arose with the intensification of
agriculturethe devotion of immense acreages to a single crop.
Such a system set the stage for explosive increases in specific
insect populations. Single-crop farming does not take advantage
of the principles by which nature works; it is agriculture as an
engineer might conceive it to be. Nature has introduced great
variety into the landscape, but man has displayed a passion for
simplifying it. us he undoes the built-in checks and balances by
which nature holds the species within bounds. One important
natural check is a limit on the amount of suitable habitat for each
species. Obviously then, an insect that lives on wheat can build up
its population to much higher levels on a farm devoted to wheat
than on one in which wheat is intermingled with other crops to
which the insect is not adapted.
e same thing happens in other situations. A generation or
more ago, the towns of large areas of the United States lined their
streets with the noble elm tree. Now the beauty they hopefully
created is threatened with complete destruction as disease sweeps
through the elms, carried by a beetle that would have only limited
chance to build up large populations and to spread from tree to
tree if the elms were only occasional trees in a richly diversified
planting.
Another factor in the modern insect problem is one that must
be viewed against a background of geologic and human history:
the spreading of thousands of different kinds of organisms from
their native homes to invade new territories. is worldwide
migration has been studied and graphically described by the
British ecologist Charles Elton in his recent book e Ecology of
Invasions. During the Cretaceous Period, some hundred million
years ago, flooding seas cut many land bridges between
continents and living things found themselves confined in what
Elton calls colossal separate nature reserves. ere, isolated
from others of their kind, they developed many new species.
When some of the land masses were joined again, about
million years ago, these species began to move out into new
territoriesa movement that is not only still in progress but is
now receiving considerable assistance from man.
e importation of plants is the primary agent in the modern
spread of species, for animals have almost invariably gone along
with the plants, quarantine being a comparatively recent and not
completely effective innovation. e United States Office of Plant
Introduction alone has introduced almost , species and
varieties of plants from all over the world. Nearly half of the
or so major insect enemies of plants in the United States are
accidental imports from abroad, and most of them have come as
hitchhikers on plants.
In new territory, out of reach of the restraining hand of the
natural enemies that kept down its numbers in its native land, an
invading plant or animal is able to become enormously abundant.
us it is no accident that our most troublesome insects are
introduced species.
ese invasions, both the naturally occurring and those
dependent on human assistance, are likely to continue
indefinitely. Quarantine and massive chemical campaigns are
only extremely expensive ways of buying time. We are faced,
according to Dr. Elton, with a life-and-death need not just to find
new technological means of suppressing this plant or that
animal; instead we need the basic knowledge of animal
populations and their relations to their surroundings that will
promote an even balance and damp down the explosive power of
outbreaks and new invasions.
Much of the necessary knowledge is now available but we do
not use it. We train ecologists in our universities and even employ
them in our governmental agencies but we seldom take their
advice. We allow the chemical death rain to fall as though there
were no alternative, whereas in fact there are many, and our
ingenuity could soon discover many more if given opportunity.
Have we fallen into a mesmerized state that makes us accept
as inevitable that which is inferior or detrimental, as though
having lost the will or the vision to demand that which is good?
Such thinking, in the words of the ecologist Paul Shepard,
idealizes life with only its head out of water, inches above the
limits of toleration of the corruption of its own environment
Why should we tolerate a diet of weak poisons, a home in insipid
surroundings, a circle of acquaintances who are not quite our
enemies, the noise of motors with just enough relief to prevent
insanity? Who would want to live in a world which is just not
quite fatal?
Yet such a world is pressed upon us. e crusade to create a
chemically sterile, insect-free world seems to have engendered a
fanatic zeal on the part of many specialists and most of the so-
called control agencies. On every hand there is evidence that
those engaged in spraying operations exercise a ruthless power.
e regulatory entomologists  function as prosecutor, judge
and jury, tax assessor and collector and sheriff to enforce their
own orders, said Connecticut entomologist Neely Turner. e
most flagrant abuses go unchecked in both state and federal
agencies.
It is not my contention that chemical insecticides must never
be used. I do contend that we have put poisonous and biologically
potent chemicals indiscriminately into the hands of persons
largely or wholly ignorant of their potentials for harm. We have
subjected enormous numbers of people to contact with these
poisons, without their consent and often without their
knowledge. If the Bill of Rights contains no guarantee that a
citizen shall be secure against lethal poisons distributed either by
private individuals or by public officials, it is surely only because
our forefathers, despite their considerable wisdom and foresight,
could conceive of no such problem.
I contend, furthermore, that we have allowed these chemicals
to be used with little or no advance investigation of their effect on
soil, water, wildlife, and man himself. Future generations are
unlikely to condone our lack of prudent concern for the integrity
of the natural world that supports all life.
ere is still very limited awareness of the nature of the threat.
is is an era of specialists, each of whom sees his own problem
and is unaware of or intolerant of the larger frame into which it
fits. It is also an era dominated by industry, in which the right to
make a dollar at whatever cost is seldom challenged. When the
public protests, confronted with some obvious evidence of
damaging results of pesticide applications, it is fed little
tranquilizing pills of half truth. We urgently need an end to these
false assurances, to the sugar coating of unpalatable facts. It is the
public that is being asked to assume the risks that the insect
controllers calculate. e public must decide whether it wishes to
continue on the present road, and it can do so only when in full
possession of the facts. In the words of Jean Rostand, e
obligation to endure gives us the right to know.
