FOR THE FIRST TIME in the history of the world, every human
being is now subjected to contact with dangerous chemicals, from
the moment of conception until death. In the less than two
decades of their use, the synthetic pesticides have been so
thoroughly distributed throughout the animate and inanimate
world that they occur virtually everywhere. ey have been
recovered from most of the major river systems and even from
streams of groundwater flowing unseen through the earth.
Residues of these chemicals linger in soil to which they may have
been applied a dozen years before. ey have entered and lodged
in the bodies of fish, birds, reptiles, and domestic and wild animals
so universally that scientists carrying on animal experiments find
it almost impossible to locate subjects free from such
contamination. ey have been found in fish in remote mountain
lakes, in earthworms burrowing in soil, in the eggs of birdsand
in man himself. For these chemicals are now stored in the bodies
of the vast majority of human beings, regardless of age. ey
occur in the mothers milk, and probably in the tissues of the
unborn child.
All this has come about because of the sudden rise and
prodigious growth of an industry for the production of man-made
or synthetic chemicals with insecticidal properties. is industry
is a child of the Second World War. In the course of developing
agents of chemical warfare, some of the chemicals created in the
laboratory were found to be lethal to insects. e discovery did
not come by chance: insects were widely used to test chemicals as
agents of death for man.
e result has been a seemingly endless stream of synthetic
insecticides. In being man-madeby ingenious laboratory
manipulation of the molecules, substituting atoms, altering their
arrangementthey differ sharply from the simpler insecticides of
prewar days. ese were derived from naturally occurring
minerals and plant productscompounds of arsenic, copper,
lead, manganese, zinc, and other minerals, pyrethrum from the
dried flowers of chrysanthemums, nicotine sulphate from some
of the relatives of tobacco, and rotenone from leguminous plants
of the East Indies.
What sets the new synthetic insecticides apart is their
enormous biological potency. ey have immense power not
merely to poison but to enter into the most vital processes of the
body and change them in sinister and often deadly ways. us, as
we shall see, they destroy the very enzymes whose function is to
protect the body from harm, they block the oxidation processes
from which the body receives its energy, they prevent the normal
functioning of various organs, and they may initiate in cer tain
cells the slow and irreversible change that leads to malignancy.
Yet new and more deadly chemicals are added to the list each
year and new uses are devised so that contact with these materials
has become practically worldwide. e production of synthetic
pesticides in the United States soared from ,- , pounds
in  to ,, pounds in more than a fivefold
increase. e wholesale value of these products was well over a
quarter of a billion dollars. But in the plans and hopes of the
industry this enormous production is only a beginning.
A Whos Who of pesticides is therefore of concern to us all. If
we are going to live so intimately with these chemicalseating
and drinking them, taking them into the very marrow of our
boneswe had better know something about their nature and
their power.
Although the Second World War marked a turning away from
inorganic chemicals as pesticides into the wonder world of the
carbon molecule, a few of the old materials persist. Chief among
these is arsenic, which is still the basic ingredient in a variety of
weed and insect killers. Arsenic is a highly toxic mineral occurring
widely in association with the ores of various metals, and in very
small amounts in volcanoes, in the sea, and in spring water. Its
relations to man are varied and historic. Since many of its
compounds are tasteless, it has been a favorite agent of homicide
from long before the time of the Borgias to the present. Arsenic
is present in English chimney soot and along with certain
aromatic hydrocarbons is considered responsible for the
carcinogenic (or cancer-causing) action of the soot, which was
recognized nearly two centuries ago by an English physician.
Epidemics of chronic arsenical poisoning involving whole
populations over long periods are on record. Arsenic-
contaminated environments have also caused sickness and death
among horses, cows, goats, pigs, deer, fishes, and bees; despite this
record arseni cal sprays and dusts are widely used. In the arsenic-
sprayed cotton country of southern United States beekeeping as
an industry has nearly died out. Farmers using arsenic dusts over
long periods have been afflicted with chronic arsenic poisoning;
livestock have been poisoned by crop sprays or weed killers
containing arsenic. Drifting arsenic dusts from blueberry lands
have spread over neighboring farms, contaminating streams,
fatally poisoning bees and cows, and causing human illness. It is
scarcely possible  to handle arsenicals with more utter disregard
of the general health than that which has been practiced in our
country in recent years, said Dr. W. C. Hueper, of the National
Cancer Institute, an authority on environmental cancer. Anyone
who has watched the dusters and sprayers of arsenical
insecticides at work must have been impressed by the almost
supreme carelessness with which the poisonous substances are
dispensed.
Modern insecticides are still more deadly. e vast majority
fall into one of two large groups of chemicals. One, represented
by DDT, is known as the chlorinated hydrocarbons. e other
group consists of the organic phosphorus insecticides, and is
represented by the reasonably familiar malathion and parathion.
All have one thing in common. As mentioned above, they are built
on a basis of carbon atoms, which are also the indispensable
building blocks of the living world, and thus classed as organic.
To understand them, we must see of what they are made, and
how, although linked with the basic chemistry of all life, they lend
themselves to the modifications which make them agents of
death.
e basic element, carbon, is one whose atoms have an almost
infinite capacity for uniting with each other in chains and rings
and various other configurations, and for becoming linked with
atoms of other substances. Indeed, the incredible diversity of
living creatures from bacteria to the great blue whale is largely
due to this capacity of carbon. e complex protein molecule has
the carbon atom as its basis, as have molecules of fat,
carbohydrates, enzymes, and vitamins. So, too, have enormous
numbers of nonliving things, for carbon is not necessarily a
symbol of life.
Some organic compounds are simply combinations of carbon
and hydrogen. e simplest of these is methane, or marsh gas,
formed in nature by the bacterial decomposition of organic
matter under water. Mixed with air in proper proportions,
methane becomes the dreaded fire damp of coal mines. Its
structure is beautifully simple, consisting of one carbon atom to
which four hydrogen atoms have become attached:
Chemists have discovered that it is possible to detach one or
all of the hydrogen atoms and substitute other elements. For
example, by substituting one atom of chlorine for one of hydrogen
we produce methyl chloride:
Take away three hydrogen atoms and substitute chlorine and
we have the anesthetic chloroform:
Substitute chlorine atoms for all of the hydrogen atoms and
the result is carbon tetrachloride, the familiar cleaning fluid:
In the simplest possible terms, these changes rung upon the
basic molecule of methane illustrate what a chlorinated
hydrocarbon is. But this illustration gives little hint of the true
complexity of the chemical world of the hydrocarbons, or of the
manipulations by which the organic chemist creates his infinitely
varied materials. For instead of the simple methane molecule with
its single carbon atom, he may work with hydrocarbon molecules
consisting of many carbon atoms, arranged in rings or chains,
with side chains or branches, holding to themselves with chemical
bonds not merely simple atoms of hydrogen or chlorine but also
a wide variety of chemical groups. By seemingly slight changes the
whole character of the substance is changed; for example, not
only what is attached but the place of attachment to the carbon
atom is highly important. Such ingenious manipulations have
produced a battery of poisons of truly extraordinary power.
DDT (short for dichloro-diphenyl-trichloro-ethane) was first
synthesized by a German chemist in , but its properties as an
insecticide were not discovered until . Almost immediately
DDT was hailed as a means of stamping out insect-borne disease
and winning the farmers war against crop destroyers overnight.
e discoverer, Paul Muller of Switzerland, won the Nobel Prize.
DDT is now so universally used that in most minds the
product takes on the harmless aspect of the familiar. Perhaps the
myth of the harmlessness of DDT rests on the fact that one of its
first uses was the wartime dusting of many thousands of soldiers,
refugees, and prisoners, to combat lice. It is widely believed that
since so many people came into extremely intimate contact with
DDT and suffered no immediate ill effects the chemical must
certainly be innocent of harm. is understandable
misconception arises from the fact thatunlike other chlorinated
hydrocarbonsDDT in powder form is not readily absorbed
through the skin. Dissolved in oil, as it usually is, DDT is definitely
toxic. If swallowed, it is absorbed slowly through the digestive
tract; it may also be absorbed through the lungs. Once it has
entered the body it is stored largely in organs rich in fatty
substances (because DDT itself is fat-soluble) such as the
adrenals, testes, or thyroid. Relatively large amounts are
deposited in the liver, kidneys, and the fat of the large, protective
mesenteries that enfold the intestines.
is storage of DDT begins with the smallest conceivable
intake of the chemical (which is present as residues on most
foodstuffs) and continues until quite high levels are reached. e
fatty storage depots act as biological magnifiers, so that an intake
of as little as / of  part per million in the diet results in storage
of about  to  parts per million, an increase of one hundredfold
or more. ese terms of reference, so commonplace to the
chemist or the pharmacologist, are unfamiliar to most of us. One
part in a million sounds like a very small amountand so it is. But
such substances are so potent that a minute quantity can bring
about vast changes in the body. In animal experiments,  parrs
per million has been found to inhibit an essential enzyme in heart
muscle; only  parts per million has brought about necrosis or
disintegration of liver cells; only . parts per million of the closely related chemicals dieldrin and chlordane did the same.
is is really not surprising. In the normal chemistry of the
human body there is just such a disparity between cause and
effect. For example, a quantity of iodine as small as two ten-
thousandths of a gram spells the difference between health and
disease. Because these small amounts of pesticides are
cumulatively stored and only slowly excreted, the threat of
chronic poisoning and degenerative changes of the liver and other
organs is very real.
Scientists do not agree upon how much DDT can be stored
in the human body. Dr. Arnold Lehman, who is the chief
pharmacologist of the Food and Drug Administration, says there
is neither a floor below which DDT is not absorbed nor a ceiling
beyond which absorption and storage ceases. On the other hand,
Dr. Wayland Hayes of the United States Public Health Service
contends that in every individual a point of equilibrium is
reached, and that DDT in excess of this amount is excreted. For
practical purposes it is not particularly important which of these
men is right. Storage in human beings has been well investigated,
and we know that the average person is storing potentially
harmful amounts. According to various studies, individuals with
no known exposure (except the inevitable dietary one) store an
average of . parts per million to . parts per million;
agricultural workers . parts per million; and workers in
insecticide plants as high as  parts per million! So the range of
proven storage is quite wide and, what is even more to the point,
the minimum figures are above the level at which damage to the
liver and other organs or tissues may begin.
One of the most sinister features of DDT and related
chemicals is the way they are passed on from one organism to
another through all the links of the food chains. For example,
fields of alfalfa are dusted with DDT; meal is later prepared from
the alfalfa and fed to hens; the hens lay eggs which contain DDT.
Or the hay, containing residues of  to  parts per million, may be
fed to cows. e DDT will turn up in the milk in the amount of
about  parts per million, but in butter made from this milk the
concentration may run to  parts per million. rough such a
process of transfer, what started out as a very small amount of
DDT may end as a heavy concentration. Farmers nowadays find
it difficult to obtain uncontaminated fodder for their milk cows,
though the Food and Drug Administration forbids the presence
of insecticide residues in milk shipped in interstate commerce.
e poison may also be passed on from mother to offspring.
Insecticide residues have been recovered from human milk in
samples tested by Food and Drug Administration scientists. is
means that the breast-fed human infant is receiving small but
regular additions to the load of toxic chemicals building up in his
body. It is by no means his first exposure, however: there is good
reason to believe this begins while he is still in the womb. In
experimental animals the chlorinated hydrocarbon insecticides
freely cross the barrier of the placenta, the traditional protective
shield between the embryo and harmful substances in the
mothers body. While the quantities so received by human infants
would normally be small, they are not unimportant because
children are more susceptible to poisoning than adults. is
situation also means that today the average individual almost
certainly starts life with the first deposit of the growing load of
chemicals his body will be required to carry thenceforth.
All these factsstorage at even low levels, subsequent
accumulation, and occurrence of liver damage at levels that may
easily occur in normal diets, caused Food and Drug
Administration scientists to declare as early as  that it is
extremely likely the potential hazard of DDT has been
underestimated. ere has been no such parallel situation in
medical history. No one yet knows what the ultimate
consequences may be.
Chlordane, another chlorinated hydrocarbon, has all these
unpleasant attributes of DDT plus a few that are peculiarly its
own. Its residues are long persistent in soil, on foodstuffs, or on
surfaces to which it may be applied. Chlordane makes use of all
available portals to enter the body. It may be absorbed through
the skin, may be breathed in as a spray or dust, and of course is
absorbed from the digestive tract if residues are swallowed. Like
all other chlorinated hydrocarbons, its deposits build up in the
body in cumulative fashion. A diet containing such a small
amount of chlordane as . parts per million may eventually lead
to storage of  parts per million in the fat of experimental
animals.
So experienced a pharmacologist as Dr. Lehman has
described chlordane in  as one of the most toxic of
insecticidesanyone handling it could be poisoned. Judging by
the carefree liberality with which dusts for lawn treatments by
suburbanites are laced with chlordane, this warning has not been
taken to heart. e fact that the suburbanite is not instantly
stricken has little meaning, for the toxins may sleep long in his
body, to become manifest months or years later in an obscure
disorder almost impossible to trace to its origins. On the other
hand, death may strike quickly. One victim who accidentally
spilled a  per cent industrial solution on the skin developed
symptoms of poisoning within  minutes and died before
medical help could be obtained. No reliance can be placed on
receiving advance warning which might allow treatment to be had
in time.
Heptachlor, one of the constituents of chlordane, is marketed
as a separate formulation. It has a particularly high capacity for
storage in fat. If the diet contains as little as / of  part per
million there will be measurable amounts of heptachlor in the
body. It also has the curious ability to undergo change into a
chemically distinct substance known as heptachlor epoxide. It
does this in soil and in the tissues of both plants and animals.
Tests on birds indicate that the epoxide that results from this
change is more toxic than the original chemical, which in turn is
four times as toxic as chlordane.
As long ago as the mid-s a special group of
hydrocarbons, the chlorinated naphthalenes, was found to cause
hepatitis, and also a rare and almost invariably fatal liver disease
in persons subjected to occupational exposure. ey have led to
illness and death of workers in electrical industries; and more
recently, in agriculture, they have been considered a cause of a
mysterious and usually fatal disease of cattle. In view of these
antecedents, it is not surprising that three of the insecticides that
are related to this group are among the most violently poisonous
of all the hydrocarbons. ese are dieldrin, aldrin, and endrin.
Dieldrin, named for a German chemist, Diels, is about  times
as toxic as DDT when swallowed but  times as toxic when
absorbed through the skin in solution. It is notorious for striking
quickly and with terrible effect at the nervous system, sending the
victims into convulsions. Persons thus poisoned recover so slowly
as to indicate chronic effects. As with other chlorinated
hydrocarbons, these long-term effects include severe damage to
the liver. e long duration of its residues and the effective
insecticidal action make dieldrin one of the most used
insecticides today, despite the appalling destruction of wildlife
that has followed its use. As tested on quail and pheasants, it has
proved to be about  to  times as toxic as DDT.
ere are vast gaps in our knowledge of how dieldrin is stored
or distributed in the body, or excreted, for the chemists ingenuity
in devising insecticides has long ago outrun biological knowledge
of the way these poisons affect the living organism. However,
there is every indication of long storage in the human body, where
deposits may lie dormant like a slumbering volcano, only to flare
up in periods of physiological stress when the body draws upon
its fat reserves. Much of what we do know has been learned
through hard experience in the antimalarial campaigns carried
out by the World Health Organization. As soon as dieldrin was
substituted for DDT in malaria-control work (because the
malaria mosquitoes had become resistant to DDT), cases of
poisoning among the spraymen began to occur. e seizures were
severefrom half to all (varying in the different programs) of the
men affected went into convulsions and several died. Some had
convulsions as long as four months after the last exposure.
Aldrin is a somewhat mysterious substance, for although it
exists as a separate entity it bears the relation of alter ego to
dieldrin. When carrots are taken from a bed treated with aldrin
they are found to contain residues of dieldrin. is change occurs
in living tissues and also in soil. Such alchemistic transformations
have led to many erroneous reports, for if a chemist, knowing
aldrin has been applied, tests for it he will be deceived into
thinking all residues have been dissipated. e residues are there,
but they are dieldrin and this requires a different test.
Like dieldrin, aldrin is extremely toxic. It produces
degenerative changes in the liver and kidneys. A quantity the size
of an aspirin tablet is enough to kill more than  quail. Many
cases of human poisonings are on record, most of them in
connection with industrial handling.
Aldrin, like most of this group of insecticides, projects a
menacing shadow into the future, the shadow of sterility.
Pheasants fed quantities too small to kill them nevertheless laid
few eggs, and the chicks that hatched soon died. e effect is not
confined to birds. Rats exposed to aldrin had fewer pregnancies
and their young were sickly and short-lived. Puppies born of
treated mothers died within three days. By one means or another,
the new generations suffer for the poisoning of their parents. No
one knows whether the same effect will be seen in human beings,
yet this chemical has been sprayed from airplanes over suburban
areas and farmlands.
Endrin is the most toxic of all the chlorinated hydrocarbons.
Although chemically rather closely related to dieldrin, a little
twist in its molecular structure makes it  times as poisonous. It
makes the progenitor of all this group of insecticides, DDT, seem
by comparison almost harmless. It is  times as poisonous as
DDT to mammals,  times as poisonous to fish, and about
times as poisonous to some birds.
In the decade of its use, endrin has killed enormous numbers
of fish, has fatally poisoned cattle that have wandered into sprayed
orchards, has poisoned wells, and has drawn a sharp warning
from at least one state health department that its careless use is
endangering human lives.
In one of the most tragic cases of endrin poisoning there was
no apparent carelessness; efforts had been made to take
precautions apparently considered adequate. A year-old child had
been taken by his American parents to live in Venezuela. ere
were cockroaches in the house to which they moved, and after a
few days a spray containing endrin was used. e baby and the
small family dog were taken out of the house before the spraying
was done about nine oclock one morning. After the spraying the
floors were washed. e baby and dog were returned to the house
in midafternoon. An hour or so later the dog vomited, went into
convulsions, and died. At  P.M. on the evening of the same day
the baby also vomited, went into convulsions, and lost
consciousness. After that fateful contact with endrin, this normal,
healthy child became little more than a vegetableunable to see
or hear, subject to frequent muscular spasms, apparently
completely cut off from contact with his surroundings. Several
months of treatment in a New York hospital failed to change his
condition or bring hope of change. It is extremely doubtful,
reported the attending physicians, that any useful degree of
recovery will occur.
e second major group of insecticides, the alkyl or organic
phosphates, are among the most poisonous chemicals in the
world. e chief and most obvious hazard attending their use is
that of acute poisoning of people applying the sprays or
accidentally coming in contact with drifting spray, with vegeta
tion coated by it, or with a discarded container. In Florida, two
children found an empty bag and used it to repair a swing. Shortly
thereafter both of them died and three of their playmates became
ill. e bag had once contained an insecticide called parathion,
one of the organic phosphates; tests established death by
parathion poisoning. On another occasion two small boys in
Wisconsin, cousins, died on the same night. One had been playing
in his yard when spray drifted in from an adjoining field where his
father was spraying potatoes with parathion; the other had run
playfully into the barn after his father and had put his hand on the
nozzle of the spray equipment.
e origin of these insecticides has a certain ironic
significance. Although some of the chemicals themselves
organic esters of phosphoric acidhad been known for many
years, their insecticidal properties remained to be discovered by a
German chemist, Gerhard Schrader, in the late s. Almost
immediately the German government recognized the value of
these same chemicals as new and devastating weapons in mans
war against his own kind, and the work on them was declared
secret. Some became the deadly nerve gases. Others, of closely
allied structure, became insecticides.
e organic phosphorus insecticides act on the living
organism in a peculiar way. ey have the ability to destroy
enzymesenzymes that perform necessary functions in the body.
eir target is the nervous system, whether the victim is an insect
or a warm-blooded animal. Under normal conditions, an impulse
passes from nerve to nerve with the aid of a chemical
transmitter called acetylcholine, a substance that performs an
essential function and then disappears. Indeed, its existence is so
ephemeral that medical researchers are unable, without special
procedures, to sample it before the body has destroyed it. is
transient nature of the transmitting chemical is necessary to the
normal functioning of the body. If the acetylcholine is not
destroyed as soon as a nerve impulse has passed, impulses con
tinue to flash across the bridge from nerve to nerve, as the
chemical exerts its effects in an ever more intensified manner. e
movements of the whole body become uncoordinated: tremors,
muscular spasms, convulsions, and death quickly result.
is contingency has been provided for by the body. A
protective enzyme called cholinesterase is at hand to destroy the
transmitting chemical once it is no longer needed. By this means
a precise balance is struck and the body never builds up a
dangerous amount of acetylcholine. But on contact with the
organic phosphorus insecticides, the protective enzyme is
destroyed, and as the quantity of the enzyme is reduced that of
the transmitting chemical builds up. In this effect, the organic
phosphorus compounds resemble the alkaloid poison muscarine,
found in a poisonous mushroom, the fly amanita.
Repeated exposures may lower the cholinesterase level until
an individual reaches the brink of acute poisoning, a brink over
which he may be pushed by a very small additional exposure. For
this reason it is considered important to make periodic
examinations of the blood of spray operators and others regularly
exposed.
Parathion is one of the most widely used of the organic
phosphates. It is also one of the most powerful and dangerous.
Honeybees become wildly agitated and bellicose on contact
with it, perform frantic cleaning movements, and are near death
within half an hour. A chemist, thinking to learn by the most
direct possible means the dose acutely toxic to human beings,
swallowed a minute amount, equivalent to about . ounce.
Paralysis followed so instantaneously that he could not reach the
antidotes he had prepared at hand, and so he died. Parathion is
now said to be a favorite instrument of suicide in Finland. In
recent years the State of California has reported an average of
more than  cases of accidental parathion poisoning annually.
In many parts of the world the fatality rate from para thion is
startling:  fatal cases in India and  in Syria in , and an
average of  deaths per year in Japan.
Yet some ,, pounds of parathion are now applied to
fields and orchards of the United Statesby hand sprayers,
motorized blowers and dusters, and by airplane. e amount used
on California farms alone could, according to one medical
authority, provide a lethal dose for  to  times the whole
worlds population.
One of the few circumstances that save us from extinction by
this means is the fact that parathion and other chemicals of this
group are decomposed rather rapidly. eir residues on the crops
to which they are applied are therefore relatively short-lived
compared with the chlorinated hydrocarbons. However, they last
long enough to create hazards and produce consequences that
range from the merely serious to the fatal. In Riverside, California,
eleven out of thirty men picking oranges became violently ill and
all but one had to be hospitalized. eir symptoms were typical of
parathion poisoning. e grove had been sprayed with parathion
some two and a half weeks earlier; the residues that reduced them
to retching, half-blind, semiconscious misery were sixteen to
nineteen days old. And this is not by any means a record for
persistence. Similar mishaps have occurred in groves sprayed a
month earlier, and residues have been found in the peel of
oranges six months after treatment with standard dosages.
e danger to all workers applying the organic phosphorus
insecticides in fields, orchards, and vineyards, is so extreme that
some states using these chemicals have established laboratories
where physicians may obtain aid in diagnosis and treatment. Even
the physicians themselves may be in some danger, unless they
wear rubber gloves in handling the victims of poisoning. So may
a laundress washing the clothing of such victims, which may have
absorbed enough parathion to affect her.
Malathion, another of the organic phosphates, is almost as
familiar to the public as DDT, being widely used by gardeners, in
household insecticides, in mosquito spraying, and in such blanket
attacks on insects as the spraying of nearly a million acres of
Florida communities for the Mediterranean fruit fly. It is
considered the least toxic of this group of chemicals and many
people assume they may use it freely and without fear of harm.
Commercial advertising encourages this comfortable attitude.
e alleged safety of malathion rests on rather precarious
ground, althoughas often happensthis was not discovered
until the chemical had been in use for several years. Malathion is
safe only because the mammalian liver, an organ with
extraordinary protective powers, renders it relatively harmless.
e detoxification is accomplished by one of the enzymes of the
liver. If, however, something destroys this enzyme or interferes
with its action, the person exposed to malathion receives the full
force of the poison.
Unfortunately for all of us, opportunities for this sort of thing
to happen are legion. A few years ago a team of Food and Drug
Administration scientists discovered that when malathion and
certain other organic phosphates are administered
simultaneously a massive poisoning resultsup to  times as
severe as would be predicted on the basis of adding together the
toxicities of the two. In other words, / of the lethal dose of
each compound may be fatal when the two are combined.
is discovery led to the testing of other combinations. It is
now known that many pairs of organic phosphate insecticides are
highly dangerous, the toxicity being stepped up or potentiated
through the combined action. Potentiation seems to take place
when one compound destroys the liver enzyme responsible for
detoxifying the other. e two need not be given simultaneously.
e hazard exists not only for the man who may spray this week
with one insecticide and next week with another; it exists also for
the consumer of sprayed products. e common salad bowl may
easily present a combination of organic phosphate insecticides.
Residues well within the legally permissible limits may interact.
e full scope of the dangerous interaction of chemicals is as
yet little known, but disturbing findings now come regularly from
scientific laboratories. Among these is the discovery that the
toxicity of an organic phosphate can be increased by a second
agent that is not necessarily an insecticide. For example, one of
the plasticizing agents may act even more strongly than another
insecticide to make malathion more dangerous. Again, this is
because it inhibits the liver enzyme that normally would draw
the teeth of the poisonous insecticide.
What of other chemicals in the normal human environment?
What, in particular, of drugs? A bare beginning has been made on
this subject, but already it is known that some organic phosphates
(parathion and malathion) increase the toxicity of some drugs
used as muscle relaxants, and that several others (again including
malathion) markedly increase the sleeping time of barbiturates.
In Greek mythology the sorceress Medea, enraged at being
supplanted by a rival for the affections of her husband Jason,
presented the new bride with a robe possessing magic properties.
e wearer of the robe immediately suffered a violent death. is
death-by-indirection now finds its counterpart in what are known
as systemic insecticides. ese are chemicals with extraordinary
properties which are used to convert plants or animals into a sort
of Medeas robe by making them actually poisonous. is is done
with the purpose of killing insects that may come in contact with
them, especially by sucking their juices or blood.
e world of systemic insecticides is a weird world, surpassing
the imaginings of the brothers Grimmperhaps most closely
akin to the cartoon world of Charles Addams. It is a world where
the enchanted forest of the fairy tales has become the poisonous
forest in which an insect that chews a leaf or sucks the sap of a
plant is doomed. It is a world where a flea bites a dog, and dies
because the dogs blood has been made poisonous, where an
insect may die from vapors emanating from a plant it has never
touched, where a bee may carry poisonous nectar back to its hive
and presently produce poisonous honey.
e entomologists dream of the built-in insecticide was born
when workers in the field of applied entomology realized they
could take a hint from nature: they found that wheat growing in
soil containing sodium selenate was immune to attack by aphids
or spider mites. Selenium, a naturally occurring element found
sparingly in rocks and soils of many parts of the world, thus
became the first systemic insecticide.
What makes an insecticide a systemic is the ability to
permeate all the tissues of a plant or animal and make them toxic.
is quality is possessed by some chemicals of the chlorinated
hydrocarbon group and by others of the organophosphorus
group, all synthetically produced, as well as by certain naturally
occurring substances. In practice, however, most systemics are
drawn from the organophosphorus group because the problem of
residues is somewhat less acute.
Systemics act in other devious ways. Applied to seeds, either
by soaking or in a coating combined with carbon, they extend
their effects into the following plant generation and produce
seedlings poisonous to aphids and other sucking insects.
Vegetables such as peas, beans, and sugar beets are sometimes
thus protected. Cotton seeds coated with a systemic insecticide
have been in use for some time in California, where  farm
laborers planting cotton in the San Joaquin Valley in  were
seized with sudden illness, caused by handling the bags of treated
seeds.
In England someone wondered what happened when bees
made use of nectar from plants treated with systemics. is was
investigated in areas treated with a chemical called schradan.
Although the plants had been sprayed before the flowers were
formed, the nectar later produced contained the poison. e
result, as might have been predicted, was that the honey made by
the bees also was contaminated with schradan.
Use of animal systemics has concentrated chiefly on control
of the cattle grub, a damaging parasite of livestock. Extreme care
must be used in order to create an insecticidal effect in the blood
and tissues of the host without setting up a fatal poisoning. e
balance is delicate and government veterinarians have found that
repeated small doses can gradually deplete an animals supply of
the protective enzyme cholinesterase, so that without warning a
minute additional dose will cause poisoning.
ere are strong indications that fields closer to our daily lives
are being opened up. You may now give your dog a pill which, it
is claimed, will rid him of fleas by making his blood poisonous to
them. e hazards discovered in treating cattle would presumably
apply to the dog. As yet no one seems to have proposed a human
systemic that would make us lethal to a mosquito. Perhaps this is
the next step.
So far in this chapter we have been discussing the deadly
chemicals that are being used in our war against the insects. What
of our simultaneous war against the weeds?
e desire for a quick and easy method of killing unwanted
plants has given rise to a large and growing array of chemicals that
are known as herbicides, or, less formally, as weed killers. e
story of how these chemicals are used and misused will be told in
Chapter ; the question that here concerns us is whether the weed
killers are poisons and whether their use is contributing to the
poisoning of the environment.
e legend that the herbicides are toxic only to plants and so
pose no threat to animal life has been widely disseminated, but
unfortunately it is not true. e plant killers include a large variety
of chemicals that act on animal tissue as well as on vegetation.
ey vary greatly in their action on the organism. Some are
general poisons, some are powerful stimulants of metabolism,
causing a fatal rise in body temperature, some induce malignant
tumors either alone or in partnership with other chemicals, some
strike at the genetic material of the race by causing gene
mutations. e herbicides, then, like the insecticides, include
some very dangerous chemicals, and their careless use in the
belief that they are safe can have disastrous results.
Despite the competition of a constant stream of new
chemicals issuing from the laboratories, arsenic compounds are
still liberally used, both as insecticides (as mentioned above) and
as weed killers, where they usually take the chemical form of
sodium arsenite. e history of their use is not reassuring. As
roadside sprays, they have cost many a farmer his cow and killed
uncounted numbers of wild creatures. As aquatic weed killers in
lakes and reservoirs they have made public waters unsuitable for
drinking or even for swimming. As a spray applied to potato fields
to destroy the vines they have taken a toll of human and
nonhuman life.
In England this latter practice developed about  as a
result of a shortage of sulfuric acid, formerly used to burn off the
potato vines. e Ministry of Agriculture considered it necessary
to give warning of the hazard of going into the arsenic-sprayed
fields, but the warning was not understood by the cattle (nor, we
must assume, by the wild animals and birds) and reports of cattle
poisoned by the arsenic sprays came with monotonous regularity.
When death came also to a farmers wife through arsenic-
contaminated water, one of the major English chemical
companies (in ) stopped production of arsenical sprays and
called in supplies already in the hands of dealers, and shortly
thereafter the Ministry of Agriculture announced that because of
high risks to people and cattle restrictions on the use of arsenites
would be imposed. In , the Australian government
announced a similar ban. No such restrictions impede the use of
these poisons in the United States, however.
Some of the dinitro compounds are also used as herbicides.
ey are rated as among the most dangerous materials of this type
in use in the United States. Dinitrophenol is a strong metabolic
stimulant. For this reason it was at one time used as a reducing
drug, but the margin between the slimming dose and that
required to poison or kill was slightso slight that several
patients died and many suffered permanent injury before use of
the drug was finally halted.
A related chemical, pentachlorophenol, sometimes known as
penta, is used as a weed killer as well as an insecticide, often
being sprayed along railroad tracks and in waste areas. Penta is
extremely toxic to a wide variety of organisms from bacteria to
man. Like the dinitros, it interferes, often fatally, with the bodys
source of energy, so that the affected organism almost literally
burns itself up. Its fearful power is illustrated in a fatal accident
recently reported by the California Department of Health. A tank
truck driver was preparing a cotton defoliant by mixing diesel oil
with pentachlorophenol. As he was drawing the concentrated
chemical out of a drum, the spigot accidentally toppled back. He
reached in with his bare hand to regain the spigot. Although he
washed immediately, he became acutely ill and died the next day.
While the results of weed killers such as sodium arsenite or
the phenols are grossly obvious, some other herbicides are more
insidious in their effects. For example, the now famous cranberry-
weed-killer aminotriazole, or amitrol, is rated as having relatively
low toxicity. But in the long run its tendency to cause malignant
tumors of the thyroid may be far more significant for wildlife and
perhaps also for man.
Among the herbicides are some that are classified as
mutagens, or agents capable of modifying the genes, the
materials of heredity. We are rightly appalled by the genetic
effects of radiation; how then, can we be indifferent to the same
effect in chemicals that we disseminate widely in our
environment?
