OF ALL our natural resources water has become the most
precious. By far the greater part of the earths surface is covered
by its enveloping seas, yet in the midst of this plenty we are in
want. By a strange paradox, most of the earths abundant water is
not usable for agriculture, industry, or human consumption
because of its heavy load of sea salts, and so most of the worlds
population is either experiencing or is threatened with critical
shortages. In an age when man has forgotten his origins and is
blind even to his most essential needs for survival, water along
with other resources has become the victim of his indifference.
e problem of water pollution by pesticides can be
understood only in context, as part of the whole to which it
belongsthe pollution of the total environment of mankind. e
pollution entering our waterways comes from many sources:
radioactive wastes from reactors, laboratories, and hospitals;
fallout from nuclear explosions; domestic wastes from cities and
towns; chemical wastes from factories. To these is added a new
kind of falloutthe chemical sprays applied to croplands and
gardens, forests and fields. Many of the chemical agents in this
alarming melange imitate and augment the harmful effects of
radiation, and within the groups of chemicals themselves there
are sinister and little-understood interactions, transformations,
and summations of effect.
Ever since chemists began to manufacture substances that
nature never invented, the problems of water purification have
become complex and the danger to users of water has increased.
As we have seen, the production of these synthetic chemicals in
large volume began in the s. It has now reached such
proportions that an appalling deluge of chemical pollution is daily
poured into the nations waterways. When inextricably mixed
with domestic and other wastes discharged into the same water,
these chemicals sometimes defy detection by the methods in
ordinary use by purification plants. Most of them are so stable
that they cannot be broken down by ordinary processes. Often
they cannot even be identified. In rivers, a really incredible variety
of pollutants combine to produce deposits that the sanitary
engineers can only despairingly refer to as gunk. Professor Rolf
Eliassen of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology testified
before a congressional committee to the impossibility of
predicting the composite effect of these chemicals, or of
identifying the organic matter resulting from the mixture. We
dont begin to know what that is, said Professor Eliassen. What
is the effect on the people? We dont know.
To an ever-increasing degree, chemicals used for the control
of insects, rodents, or unwanted vegetation contribute to these
organic pollutants. Some are deliberately applied to bodies of
water to destroy plants, insect larvae, or undesired fishes. Some
come from forest spraying that may blanket two or three million
acres of a single state with spray directed against a single insect
pestspray that falls directly into streams or that drips down
through the leafy canopy to the forest floor, there to become part
of the slow movement of seeping moisture beginning its long
journey to the sea. Probably the bulk of such contaminants are the
waterborne residues of the millions of pounds of agricultural
chemicals that have been applied to farmlands for insect or
rodent control and have been leached out of the ground by rains
to become part of the universal seaward movement of water.
Here and there we have dramatic evidence of the presence of
these chemicals in our streams and even in public water supplies.
For example, a sample of drinking water from an orchard area in
Pennsylvania, when tested on fish in a laboratory, contained
enough insecticide to kill all of the test fish in only four hours.
Water from a stream draining sprayed cotton fields remained
lethal to fishes even after it had passed through a purifying plant,
and in fifteen streams tributary to the Tennessee River in
Alabama the runoff from fields treated with toxaphene, a
chlorinated hydrocarbon, killed all the fish inhabiting the
streams. Two of these streams were sources of municipal water
supply. Yet for a week after the application of the insecticide the
water remained poisonous, a fact attested by the daily deaths of
goldfish suspended in cages downstream.
For the most part this pollution is unseen and invisible,
making its presence known when hundreds or thousands of fish
die, but more often never detected at all. e chemist who guards
water purity has no routine tests for these organic pollutants and
no way to remove them. But whether detected or not, the
pesticides are there, and as might be expected with any materials
applied to land surfaces on so vast a scale, they have now found
their way into many and perhaps all of the major river systems of
the country.
If anyone doubts that our waters have become almost
universally contaminated with insecticides he should study a
small report issued by the United States Fish and Wildlife Service
in . e Service had carried out studies to discover whether
fish, like warm-blooded animals, store insecticides in their tissues.
e first samples were taken from forest areas in the West where
there had been mass spraying of DDT for the control of the spruce
budworm. As might have been expected, all of these fish
contained DDT. e really significant findings were made when
the investigators turned for comparison to a creek in a remote
area about  miles from the nearest spraying for budworm
control. is creek was upstream from the first and separated
from it by a high waterfall. No local spraying was known to have
occurred. Yet these fish, too, contained DDT. Had the chemical
reached this remote creek by hidden underground streams? Or
had it been airborne, drifting down as fallout on the surface of the
creek? In still another comparative study, DDT was found in the
tissues of fish from a hatchery where the water supply originated
in a deep well. Again there was no record of local spraying. e
only possible means of contamination seemed to be by means of
groundwater.
In the entire water-pollution problem, there is probably
nothing more disturbing than the threat of widespread
contamination of groundwater. It is not possible to add pesticides
to water anywhere without threatening the purity of water
everywhere. Seldom if ever does Nature operate in closed and
separate compartments, and she has not done so in distributing
the earths water supply. Rain, falling on the land, settles down
through pores and cracks in soil and rock, penetrating deeper and
deeper until eventually it reaches a zone where all the pores of the
rock are filled with water, a dark, subsurface sea, rising under hills,
sinking beneath valleys. is groundwater is always on the move,
sometimes at a pace so slow that it travels no more than  feet a
year, sometimes rapidly, by comparison, so that it moves nearly a
tenth of a mile in a day. It travels by unseen waterways until here
and there it comes to the surface as a spring, or perhaps it is
tapped to feed a well. But mostly it contributes to streams and so
to rivers. Except for what enters streams directly as rain or surface
runoff, all the running water of the earths surface was at one time
groundwater. And so, in a very real and frightening sense,
pollution of the groundwater is pollution of water everywhere.
It must have been by such a dark, underground sea that
poisonous chemicals traveled from a manufacturing plant in
Colorado to a farming district several miles away, there to poison
wells, sicken humans and livestock, and damage cropsan ex
traordinary episode that may easily be only the first of many like
it. Its history, in brief, is this. In , the Rocky Mountain
Arsenal of the Army Chemical Corps, located near Denver, began
to manufacture war materials. Eight years later the facilities of the
arsenal were leased to a private oil company for the production of
insecticides. Even before the change of operations, however,
mysterious reports had begun to come in. Farmers several miles
from the plant began to report unexplained sickness among
livestock; they complained of extensive crop damage. Foliage
turned yellow, plants failed to mature, and many crops were killed
outright. ere were reports of human illness, thought by some
to be related.
e irrigation waters on these farms were derived from
shallow wells. When the well waters were examined (in a study in
, in which several stare and federal agencies participated)
they were found to contain an assortment of chemicals.
Chlorides, chlorates, salts of phosphonic acid, fluorides, and
arsenic had been discharged from the Rocky Mountain Arsenal
into holding ponds during the years of its operation. Apparently
the groundwater between the arsenal and the farms had become
contaminated and it had taken  to  years for the wastes to travel
underground a distance of about  miles from the holding ponds
to the nearest farm. is seepage had continued to spread and had
further contaminated an area of unknown extent. e
investigators knew of no way to contain the contamination or halt
its advance.
All this was bad enough, but the most mysterious and
probably in the long run the most significant feature of the whole
episode was the discovery of the weed killer ,-D in some of the
wells and in the holding ponds of the arsenal. Certainly its
presence was enough to account for the damage to crops irrigated
with this water. But the mystery lay in the fact that no ,-D had
been manufactured at the arsenal at any stage of its operations.
After long and careful study, the chemists at the plant
concluded that the ,-D had been formed spontaneously in the
open basins. It had been formed there from other substances
discharged from the arsenal; in the presence of air, water, and
sunlight, and quite without the intervention of human chemists,
the holding ponds had become chemical laboratories for the
production of a new chemicala chemical fatally damaging to
much of the plant life it touched.
And so the story of the Colorado farms and their damaged
crops assumes a significance that transcends its local importance.
What other parallels may there be, not only in Colorado but
wherever chemical pollution finds its way into public waters? In
lakes and streams everywhere, in the presence of catalyzing air
and sunlight, what dangerous substances may be born of parent
chemicals labeled harmless?
Indeed one of the most alarming aspects of the chemical
pollution of water is the fact that herein river or lake or
reservoir, or for that matter in the glass of water served at your
dinner tableare mingled chemicals that no responsible chemist
would think of combining in his laboratory. e possible
interactions between these freely mixed chemicals are deeply
disturbing to officials of the United States Public Health Service,
who have expressed the fear that the production of harmful
substances from comparatively innocuous chemicals may be
taking place on quite a wide scale. e reactions may be between
two or more chemicals, or between chemicals and the radioactive
wastes that are being discharged into our rivers in ever-increasing
volume. Under the impact of ionizing radiation some
rearrangement of atoms could easily occur, changing the nature
of the chemicals in a way that is not only unpredictable but
beyond control.
It is, of course, not only the groundwaters that are becoming
contaminated, but surface-moving waters as wellstreams,
rivers, irrigation waters. A disturbing example of the latter seems
to be building up on the national wildlife refuges at Tule Lake and
Lower Klamath, both in California. ese refuges are part of a
chain including also the refuge on Upper Klamath Lake just over
the border in Oregon. All are linked, perhaps fatefully, by a shared
water supply, and all are affected by the fact that they lie like small
islands in a great sea of surrounding farmlandsland reclaimed
by drainage and stream diversion from an original waterfowl
paradise of marshland and open water.
ese farmlands around the refuges are now irrigated by
water from Upper Klamath Lake. e irrigation waters, re-
collected from the fields they have served, are then pumped into
Tule Lake and from there to Lower Klamath. All of the waters of
the wildlife refuges established on these two bodies of water
therefore represent the drainage of agricultural lands. It is
important to remember this in connection with recent
happenings.
In the summer of  the refuge staff picked up hundreds of
dead and dying birds at Tule Lake and Lower Klamath. Most of
them were fish-eating speciesherons, pelicans, grebes, gulls.
Upon analysis, they were found to contain insecticide residues
identified as toxaphene, DDD, and DDE. Fish from the lakes were
also found to contain insecticides; so did samples of plankton. e
refuge manager believes that pesticide residues are now building
up in the waters of these refuges, being conveyed there by return
irrigation flow from heavily sprayed agricultural lands.
Such poisoning of waters set aside for conservation purposes
could have consequences felt by every western duck hunter and
by everyone to whom the sight and sound of drifting ribbons of
waterfowl across an evening sky are precious. ese particular
refuges occupy critical positions in the conservation of western
waterfowl. ey lie at a point corresponding to the narrow neck
of a funnel, into which all the migratory paths composing what is
known as the Pacific Flyway converge. During the fall migration
they receive many millions of ducks and geese from nesting
grounds extending from the shores of Bering Sea east to Hudson
Bayfully three fourths of all the waterfowl that move south into
the Pacific Coast states in autumn. In summer they provide
nesting areas for waterfowl, especially for two endangered
species, the redhead and the ruddy duck. If the lakes and pools of
these refuges become seriously contaminated, the damage to the
waterfowl populations of the Far West could be irreparable.
Water must also be thought of in terms of the chains of life it
supportsfrom the small-as-dust green cells of the drifting plant
plankton, through the minute water fleas to the fishes that strain
plankton from the water and are in turn eaten by other fishes or
by birds, mink, raccoonsin an endless cyclic transfer of
materials from life to life. We know that the necessary minerals
in the water are so passed from link to link of the food chains. Can
we suppose that poisons we introduce into water will not also
enter into these cycles of nature?
e answer is to be found in the amazing history of Clear
Lake, California. Clear Lake lies in mountainous country some
miles north of San Francisco and has long been popular with
anglers. e name is inappropriate, for actually it is a rather turbid
lake because of the soft black ooze that covers its shallow bottom.
Unfortunately for the fishermen and the resort dwellers on its
shores, its waters have provided an ideal habitat for a small gnat,
Chaoborus astictopus. Although closely related to mosquitoes,
the gnat is not a bloodsucker and probably does not feed at all as
an adult. However, human beings who shared its habitat found it
annoying because of its sheer numbers. Efforts were made to
control it but they were largely fruitless until, in the late s,
the chlorinated hydrocarbon insecticides offered new weapons.
e chemical chosen for a fresh attack was DDD, a close relative
of DDT but apparently offering fewer threats to fish life.
e new control measures undertaken in  were carefully
planned and few people would have supposed any harm could
result. e lake was surveyed, its volume determined, and the
insecticide applied in such great dilution that for every part of
chemical there would be  million parts of water. Control of the
gnats was at first good, but by  the treatment had to be
repeated, this time at the rate of  part of insecticide in  million
pans of water. e destruction of the gnats was thought to be
virtually complete.
e following winter months brought the first intimation that
other life was affected: the western grebes on the lake began to
die, and soon more than a hundred of them were reported dead.
At Clear Lake the western grebe is a breeding bird and also a
winter visitant, attracted by the abundant fish of the lake. It is a
bird of spectacular appearance and beguiling habits, building its
floating nests in shallow lakes of western United States and
Canada. It is called the swan grebe with reason, for it glides with
scarcely a ripple across the lake surface, the body riding low, white
neck and shining black head held high. e newly hatched chick
is clothed in soft gray down; in only a few hours it takes to the
water and rides on the back of the father or mother, nestled under
the parental wing coverts.
Following a third assault on the ever-resilient gnat population,
in , more grebes died. As had been true in , no evidence
of infectious disease could be discovered on examination of the
dead birds. But when someone thought to analyze the fatty tissues
of the grebes, they were found to be loaded with DDD in the
extraordinary concentration of  parts per million.
e maximum concentration applied to the water was /
part per million. How could the chemical have built up to such
prodigious levels in the grebes? ese birds, of course, are fish
eaters. When the fish of Clear Lake also were analyzed the picture
began to take formthe poison being picked up by the smallest
organisms, concentrated and passed on to the larger predators.
Plankton organisms were found to contain about  parts per
million of the insecticide (about  times the maximum
concentration ever reached in the water itself); plant-eating fishes
had built up accumulations ranging from  to  pans per
million; carnivorous species had stored the most of all. One, a
brown bullhead, had the astounding concentration of  parts
per million. It was a house-that-Jack-built sequence, in which the
large carnivores had eaten the smaller carnivores, that had eaten
the herbivores, that had eaten the plankton, that had absorbed the
poison from the water.
Even more extraordinary discoveries were made later. No
trace of DDD could be found in the water shortly after the last
application of the chemical. But the poison had not really left the
lake; it had merely gone into the fabric of the life the lake
supports. Twenty-three months after the chemical treatment had
ceased, the plankton still contained as much as . parts per
million. In that interval of nearly two years, successive crops of
plankton had flowered and faded away, but the poison, although
no longer present in the water, had somehow passed from
generation to generation. And it lived on in the animal life of the
lake as well. All fish, birds, and frogs examined a year after the
chemical applications had ceased still contained DDD. e
amount found in the flesh always exceeded by many times the
original concentration in the water. Among these living carriers
were fish that had hatched nine months after the last DDD
application, grebes, and California gulls that had built up
concentrations of more than  parts per million. Meanwhile,
the nesting colonies of the grebes dwindledfrom more than
pairs before the first insecticide treatment to about  pairs
in . And even the thirty seem to have nested in vain, for no
young grebes have been observed on the lake since the last DDD
application.
is whole chain of poisoning, then, seems to rest on a base of
minute plants which must have been the original con centrators.
But what of the opposite end of the food chainthe human being
who, in probable ignorance of all this sequence of events, has
rigged his fishing tackle, caught a string of fish from the waters of
Clear Lake, and taken them home to fry for his supper? What
could a heavy dose of DDD, or perhaps repeated doses, do to him?
Although the California Department of Public Health
professed to see no hazard, nevertheless in  it required that
the use of DDD in the lake be stopped. In view of the scientific
evidence of the vast biological potency of this chemical, the action
seems a minimum safety measure. e physiological effect of
DDD is probably unique among insecticides, for it destroys part
of the adrenal glandthe cells of the outer layer known as the
adrenal cortex, which secretes the hormone cortin. is
destructive effect, known since , was at first believed to be
confined to dogs, because it was not revealed in such
experimental animals as monkeys, rats, or rabbits. It seemed
suggestive, however, that DDD produced in dogs a condition very
similar to that occurring in man in the presence of Addisons
disease. Recent medical research has revealed that DDD does
strongly suppress the function of the human adrenal cortex. Its
cell-destroying capacity is now clinically utilized in the treatment
of a rare type of cancer which develops in the adrenal gland.
e Clear Lake situation brings up a question that the public
needs to face: Is it wise or desirable to use substances with such
strong effect on physiological processes for the control of insects,
especially when the control measures involve introducing the
chemical directly into a body of water? e fact that the
insecticide was applied in very low concentrations is meaningless,
as its explosive progress through the natural food chain in the lake
demonstrates. Yet Clear Lake is typical of a large and growing
number of situations where solution of an obvious and often
trivial problem creates a far more serious but conveniently less
tangible one. Here the problem was resolved in favor of those
annoyed by gnats, and at the expense of an unstated, and probably
not even clearly understood, risk to all who took food or water
from the lake.
It is an extraordinary fact that the deliberate introduction of
poisons into a reservoir is becoming a fairly common practice.
e purpose is usually to promote recreational uses, even though
the water must then be treated at some expense to make it fit for
its intended use as drinking water. When sportsmen of an area
want to improve fishing in a reservoir, they prevail on
authorities to dump quantities of poison into it to kill the
undesired fish, which are then replaced with hatchery fish more
suited to the sportsmens taste. e procedure has a strange,
Alice-in-Wonderland quality. e reservoir was created as a
public water supply, yet the community, probably unconsulted
about the sportsmens project, is forced either to drink water
containing poisonous residues or to pay out tax money for
treatment of the water to remove the poisonstreatments that
are by no means foolproof.
As ground and surface waters are contaminated with
pesticides and other chemicals, there is danger that not only
poisonous but also cancer-producing substances are being
introduced into public water supplies. Dr. W. C. Hueper of the
National Cancer Institute has warned that the danger of cancer
hazards from the consumption of contaminated drinking water
will grow considerably within the foreseeable future. And indeed
a study made in Holland in the early s provides support for
the view that polluted waterways may carry a cancer hazard.
Cities receiving their drinking water from rivers had a higher
death rate from cancer than did those whose water came from
sources presumably less susceptible to pollution such as wells.
Arsenic, the environmental substance most clearly established as
causing cancer in man, is involved in two historic cases in which
polluted water supplies caused widespread occurrence of cancer.
In one case the arsenic came from the slag heaps of mining
operations, in the other from rock with a high natural content of
arsenic. ese conditions may easily be duplicated as a result of
heavy applications of arsenical insecticides. e soil in such areas
becomes poisoned. Rains then carry pan of the arsenic into
streams, rivers, and reservoirs, as well as into the vast
subterranean seas of groundwater.
Here again we are reminded that in nature nothing exists
alone. To understand more clearly how the pollution of our world
is happening, we must now look at another of the earths basic
resources, the soil.
