THE THIN LAYER of soil that forms a patchy covering over the
continents controls our own existence and that of every other
animal of the land. Without soil, land plants as we know them
could not grow, and without plants no animals could survive.
Yet if our agriculture-based life depends on the soil, it is
equally true that soil depends on life, its very origins and the
maintenance of its true nature being intimately related to living
plants and animals. For soil is in part a creation of life, born of a
marvelous interaction of life and nonlife long eons ago. e
parent materials were gathered together as volcanoes poured
them out in fiery streams, as waters running over the bare rocks
of the continents wore away even the hardest granite, and as the
chisels of frost and ice split and shattered the rocks. en living
things began to work their creative magic and little by little these
inert materials became soil. Lichens, the rocks first covering,
aided the process of disintegration by their acid secretions and
made a lodging place for other life. Mosses took hold in the little
pockets of simple soilsoil formed by crumbling bits of lichen,
by the husks of minute insect life, by the debris of a fauna
beginning its emergence from the sea.
Life not only formed the soil, but other living things of
incredible abundance and diversity now exist within it; if this were
not so the soil would be a dead and sterile thing. By their presence
and by their activities the myriad organisms of the soil make it
capable of supporting the earths green mantle.
e soil exists in a state of constant change, taking part in
cycles that have no beginning and no end. New materials are
constantly being contributed as rocks disintegrate, as organic
matter decays and as nitrogen and other gases are brought down
in rain from the skies. At the same time other materials are being
taken away, borrowed for temporary use by living creatures.
Subtle and vastly important chemical changes are constantly in
progress, converting elements derived from air and water into
forms suitable for use by plants. In all these changes living
organisms are active agents.
ere are few studies more fascinating, and at the same time
more neglected, than those of the teeming populations that exist
in the dark realms of the soil. We know too little of the threads
that bind the soil organisms to each other and to their world, and
to the world above.
Perhaps the most essential organisms in the soil are the
smallestthe invisible hosts of bacteria and of threadlike fungi.
Statistics of their abundance take us at once into astronomical
figures. A teaspoonful of topsoil may contain billions of bacteria.
In spite of their minute size, the total weight of this host of
bacteria in the top foot of a single acre of fertile soil may be as
much as a thousand pounds. Ray fungi, growing in long threadlike
filaments, are somewhat less numerous than the bacteria, yet
because they are larger their total weight in a given amount of soil
may be about the same. With small green cells called algae, these
make up the microscopic plant life of the soil.
Bacteria, fungi, and algae are the principal agents of decay,
reducing plant and animal residues to their component minerals.
e vast cyclic movements of chemical elements such as carbon
and nitrogen through soil and air and living tissue could not
proceed without these microplants. Without the nitrogen-fixing
bacteria, for example, plants would starve for want of nitrogen,
though surrounded by a sea of nitrogen-containing air. Other
organisms form carbon dioxide, which, as carbonic acid, aids in
dissolving rock. Still other soil microbes perform various
oxidations and reductions by which minerals such as iron,
manganese, and sulfur are transformed and made available to
plants.
Also present in prodigious numbers are microscopic mites
and primitive wingless insects called springtails. Despite their
small size they play an important part in breaking down the
residues of plants, aiding in the slow conversion of the litter of the
forest floor to soil. e specialization of some of these minute
creatures for their task is almost incredible. Several species of
mites, for example, can begin life only within the fallen needles of
a spruce tree. Sheltered here, they digest out the inner tissues of
the needle. When the mites have completed their development
only the outer layer of cells remains. e truly staggering task of
dealing with the tremendous amount of plant material in the
annual leaf fall belongs to some of the small insects of the soil and
the forest floor. ey macerate and digest the leaves, and aid in
mixing the decomposed matter with the surface soil.
Besides all this horde of minute but ceaselessly toiling
creatures there are of course many larger forms, for soil life runs
the gamut from bacteria to mammals. Some are permanent
residents of the dark subsurface layers; some hibernate or spend
definite parts of their life cycles in underground chambers; some
freely come and go between their burrows and the upper world.
In general the effect of all this habitation of the soil is to aerate it
and improve both its drainage and the penetration of water
throughout the layers of plant growth.
Of all the larger inhabitants of the soil, probably none is more
important than the earthworm. Over three quarters of a century
ago, Charles Darwin published a book titled e Formation of
Vegetable Mould, through the Action of Worms, with Observations
on eir Habits. In it he gave the world its first understanding of
the fundamental role of earthworms as geologic agents for the
transport of soila picture of surface rocks being gradually
covered by fine soil brought up from below by the worms, in
annual amounts running to many tons to the acre in most
favorable areas. At the same time, quantities of organic matter
contained in leaves and grass (as much as  pounds to the square
yard in six months) are drawn down into the burrows and
incorporated in soil. Darwins calculations showed that the toil of
earthworms might add a layer of soil an inch to an inch and a half
thick in a ten-year period. And this is by no means all they do:
their burrows aerate the soil, keep it well drained, and aid the
penetration of plant roots. e presence of earthworms increases
the nitrifying powers of the soil bacteria and decreases
putrifaction of the soil. Organic matter is broken down as it passes
through the digestive tracts of the worms and the soil is enriched
by their excretory products.
is soil community, then, consists of a web of interwoven
lives, each in some way related to the othersthe living creatures
depending on the soil, but the soil in turn a vital element of the
earth only so long as this community within it flourishes.
e problem that concerns us here is one that has received
little consideration: What happens to these incredibly numerous
and vitally necessary inhabitants of the soil when poisonous
chemicals are carried down into their world, either introduced
directly as soil sterilants or borne on the rain that has picked up
a lethal contamination as it filters through the leaf canopy of
forest and orchard and cropland? Is it reasonable to suppose that
we can apply a broad-spectrum insecticide to kill the burrowing
larval stages of a crop-destroying insect, for example, without also
killing the good insects whose function may be the essential one
of breaking down organic matter? Or can we use a nonspecific
fungicide without also killing the fungi that inhabit the roots of
many trees in a beneficial association that aids the tree in
extracting nutrients from the soil?
e plain truth is that this critically important subject of the
ecology of the soil has been largely neglected even by scientists
and almost completely ignored by control men. Chemical control
of insects seems to have proceeded on the assumption that the
soil could and would sustain any amount of insult via the
introduction of poisons without striking back. e very nature of
the world of the soil has been largely ignored.
From the few studies that have been made, a picture of the
impact of pesticides on the soil is slowly emerging. It is not
surprising that the studies are not always in agreement, for soil
types vary so enormously that what causes damage in one may be
innocuous in another. Light sandy soils suffer far more heavily
than humus types. Combinations of chemicals seem to do more
harm than separate applications. Despite the varying results,
enough solid evidence of harm is accumulating to cause
apprehension on the part of many scientists.
Under some conditions, the chemical conversions and
transformations that lie at the very heart of the living world are
affected. Nitrification, which makes atmospheric nitrogen
available to plants, is an example. e herbicide ,-D causes a
temporary interruption of nitrification. In recent experiments in
Florida, lindane, heptachlor, and BHC (benzene hexachloride)
reduced nitrification after only two weeks in soil; BHC and DDT
had significantly detrimental effects a year after treatment. In
other experiments BHC, aldrin, lindane, heptachlor, and DDD all
prevented nitrogen-fixing bacteria from forming the necessary
root nodules on leguminous plants. A curious but beneficial
relation between fungi and the roots of higher plants is seriously
disrupted.
Sometimes the problem is one of upsetting that delicate
balance of populations by which nature accomplishes far-
reaching aims. Explosive increases in some kinds of soil
organisms have occurred when others have been reduced by
insecticides, disturbing the relation of predator to prey. Such
changes could easily alter the metabolic activity of the soil and
affect its productivity. ey could also mean that potentially
harmful organisms, formerly held in check, could escape from
their natural controls and rise to pest status.
One of the most important things to remember about in
secticides in soil is their long persistence, measured not in months
but in years. Aldrin has been recovered after four years, both as
traces and more abundantly as converted to dieldrin. Enough
toxaphene remains in sandy soil ten years after its application to
kill termites. Benzene hexachloride persists at least eleven years;
heptachlor or a more toxic derived chemical, at least nine.
Chlordane has been recovered twelve years after its application,
in the amount of  per cent of the original quantity.
Seemingly moderate applications of insecticides over a period
of years may build up fantastic quantities in soil. Since the
chlorinated hydrocarbons are persistent and long-lasting, each
application is merely added to the quantity remaining from the
previous one. e old legend that a pound of DDT to the acre is
harmless means nothing if spraying is repeated. Potato soils have
been found to contain up to  pounds of DDT per acre, corn soils
up to . A cranberry bog under study contained . pounds to
the acre. Soils from apple orchards seem to reach the peak of
contamination, with DDT accumulating at a rate that almost
keeps pace with its rate of annual application. Even in a single
season, with orchards sprayed four or more times, DDT residues
may build up to peaks of  to  pounds. With repeated spraying
over the years the range between trees is from  to  pounds to
the acre; under trees, up to  pounds.
Arsenic provides a classic case of the virtually permanent
poisoning of the soil. Although arsenic as a spray on growing
tobacco has been largely replaced by the synthetic organic
insecticides since the mid-os, the arsenic content of cigarettes
made from American-grown tobacco increased more than  per
cent between the years  and . Later studies have revealed
increases of as much as  per cent. Dr. Henry S. Satterlee, an
authority on arsenic toxicology, says that although organic
insecticides have been largely substituted for arsenic, the tobacco
plants continue to pick up the old poison, for the soils of tobacco
plantations are now thoroughly impregnated with residues of a
heavy and relatively insoluble poison, arsenate of lead. is will
continue to release arsenic in soluble form. e soil of a large
proportion of the land planted to tobacco has been subjected to
cumulative and well-nigh permanent poisoning, according to
Dr. Satterlee. Tobacco grown in the eastern Mediterranean
countries where arsenical insecticides are not used has shown no
such increase in arsenic content.
We are therefore confronted with a second problem. We
must not only be concerned with what is happening to the soil;
we must wonder to what extent insecticides are absorbed from
contaminated soils and introduced into plant tissues. Much
depends on the type of soil, the crop, and the nature and
concentration of the insecticide. Soil high in organic matter
releases smaller quantities of poisons than others. Carrots absorb
more insecticide than any other crop studied; if the chemical used
happens to be lindane, carrots actually accumulate higher
concentrations than are present in the soil. In the future it may
become necessary to analyze soils for insecticides before planting
certain food crops. Otherwise even unsprayed crops may take up
enough insecticide merely from the soil to render them unfit for
market.
is very sort of contamination has created endless problems
for at least one leading manufacturer of baby foods who has been
unwilling to buy any fruits or vegetables on which toxic
insecticides have been used. e chemical that caused him the
most trouble was benzene hexachloride (BHC), which is taken up
by the roots and tubers of plants, advertising its presence by a
musty taste and odor. Sweet potatoes grown on California fields
where BHC had been used two years earlier contained residues
and had to be rejected. In one year, in which the firm had
contracted in South Carolina for its total requirements of sweet
potatoes, so large a proportion of the acreage was found to be
contaminated that the company was forced to buy in the open
market at a considerable financial loss. Over the years a variety of
fruits and vegetables, grown in various states, have had to be
rejected. e most stubborn problems were concerned with
peanuts. In the southern states peanuts are usually grown in
rotation with cotton, on which BHC is extensively used. Peanuts
grown later in this soil pick up considerable amounts of the
insecticide. Actually, only a trace is enough to incorporate the
telltale musty odor and taste. e chemical penetrates the nuts
and cannot be removed. Processing, far from removing the
mustiness, sometimes accentuates it. e only course open to a
manufacturer determined to exclude BHC residues is to reject all
produce treated with the chemical or grown on soils
contaminated with it.
Sometimes the menace is to the crop itselfa menace that
remains as long as the insecticide contamination is in the soil.
Some insecticides affect sensitive plants such as beans, wheat,
barley, or rye, retarding root development or depressing growth
of seedlings. e experience of the hop growers in Washington
and Idaho is an example. During the spring of  many of these
growers undertook a large-scale program to control the
strawberry root weevil, whose larvae had become abundant on
the roots of the hops. On the advice of agricultural experts and
insecticide manufacturers, they chose heptachlor as the control
agent. Within a year after the heptachlor was applied, the vines in
the treated yards were wilting and dying. In the untreated fields
there was no trouble; the damage stopped at the border between
treated and untreated fields. e hills were replanted at great
expense, but in another year the new roots, too, were found to be
dead. Four years later the soil still contained heptachlor, and
scientists were unable to predict how long it would remain
poisonous, or to recommend any procedure for correcting the
condition. e federal Department of Agriculture, which as late
as March  found itself in the anomalous position of declaring
heptachlor to be acceptable for use on hops in the form of a soil
treatment, belatedly withdrew its registration for such use.
Meanwhile, the hop growers sought what redress they could in
the courts.
As applications of pesticides continue and the virtually
indestructible residues continue to build up in the soil, it is almost
certain that we are heading for trouble. is was the consensus of
a group of specialists who met at Syracuse University in  to
discuss the ecology of the soil. ese men summed up the hazards
of using such potent and little understood tools as chemicals
and radiation: A few false moves on the part of man may result
in destruction of soil productivity and the arthropods may well
take over.
