WATER, SOIL, and the earths green mantle of plants make up
the world that supports the animal life of the earth. Although
modern man seldom remembers the fact, he could not exist
without the plants that harness the suns energy and manufacture
the basic foodstuffs he depends upon for life. Our attitude toward
plants is a singularly narrow one. If we see any immediate utility
in a plant we foster it. If for any reason we find its presence
undesirable or merely a matter of indifference, we may condemn
it to destruction forthwith. Besides the various plants that are
poisonous to man or his livestock, or crowd out food plants, many
are marked for destruction merely because, according to our
narrow view, they happen to be in the wrong place at the wrong
time. Many others are destroyed merely because they happen to
be associates of the unwanted plants.
e earths vegetation is part of a web of life in which there
are intimate and essential relations between plants and the earth,
between plants and other plants, between plants and animals.
Sometimes we have no choice but to disturb these relationships,
but we should do so thoughtfully, with full awareness that what
we do may have consequences remote in time and place. But no
such humility marks the booming weed killer business of the
present day, in which soaring sales and expanding uses mark the
production of plant-killing chemicals.
One of the most tragic examples of our unthinking
bludgeoning of the landscape is to be seen in the sagebrush lands
of the West, where a vast campaign is on to destroy the sage and
to substitute grasslands. If ever an enterprise needed to be
illuminated with a sense of the history and meaning of the
landscape, it is this. For here the natural landscape is eloquent of
the interplay of forces that have created it. It is spread before us
like the pages of an open book in which we can read why the land
is what it is, and why we should preserve its integrity. But the
pages lie unread.
e land of the sage is the land of the high western plains and
the lower slopes of the mountains that rise above them, a land
born of the great uplift of the Rocky Mountain system many
millions of years ago. It is a place of harsh extremes of climate: of
long winters when blizzards drive down from the mountains and
snow lies deep on the plains, of summers whose heat is relieved
by only scanty rains, with drought biting deep into the soil, and
drying winds stealing moisture from leaf and stem.
As the landscape evolved, there must have been a long period
of trial and error in which plants attempted the colonization of
this high and windswept land. One after another must have failed.
At last one group of plants evolved which combined all the
qualities needed to survive. e sagelow-growing and
shrubbycould hold its place on the mountain slopes and on the
plains, and within its small gray leaves it could hold moisture
enough to defy the thieving winds. It was no accident, but rather
the result of long ages of experimentation by nature, that the great plains of the West became the land of the sage.
Along with the plants, animal life, too, was evolving in
harmony with the searching requirements of the land. In time
there were two as perfectly adjusted to their habitat as the sage.
One was a mammal, the fleet and graceful pronghorn antelope.
e other was a bird, the sage grousethe cock of the plains of
Lewis and Clark.
e sage and the grouse seem made for each other. e
original range of the bird coincided with the range of the sage, and
as the sagelands have been reduced, so the populations of grouse
have dwindled. e sage is all things to these birds of the plains.
e low sage of the foothill ranges shelters their nests and their
young; the denser growths are loafing and roosting areas; at all
times the sage provides the staple food of the grouse. Yet it is a
two-way relationship. e spectacular courtship displays of the
cocks help loosen the soil beneath and around the sage, aiding
invasion by grasses which grow in the shelter of sagebrush.
e antelope, too, have adjusted their lives to the sage. ey
are primarily animals of the plains, and in winter when the first
snows come those that have summered in the mountains move
down to the lower elevations. ere the sage provides the food
that tides them over the winter. Where all other plants have shed
their leaves, the sage remains evergreen, the gray-green leaves
bitter, aromatic, rich in proteins, fats, and needed minerals
clinging to the stems of the dense and shrubby plants. ough the
snows pile up, the tops of the sage remain exposed, or can be
reached by the sharp, pawing hoofs of the antelope. en grouse
feed on them too, finding them on bare and windswept ledges or
following the antelope to feed where they have scratched away the
snow.
And other life looks to the sage. Mule deer often feed on it.
Sage may mean survival for winter-grazing livestock. Sheep graze
many winter ranges where the big sagebrush forms almost pure
stands. For half the year it is their principal forage, a plant of
higher energy value than even alfalfa hay.
e bitter upland plains, the purple wastes of sage, the wild,
swift antelope, and the grouse are then a natural system in perfect
balance. Are? e verb must be changedat least in those already
vast and growing areas where man is attempting to improve on
natures way. In the name of progress the land management
agencies have set about to satisfy the insatiable demands of the
cattlemen for more grazing land. By this they mean grassland
grass without sage. So in a land which nature found suited to grass
growing mixed with and under the shelter of sage, it is now
proposed to eliminate the sage and create unbroken grassland.
Few seem to have asked whether grasslands are a stable and
desirable goal in this region. Certainly natures own answer was
otherwise. e annual precipitation in this land where the rains
seldom fall is not enough to support good sod-forming grass; it
favors rather the perennial bunchgrass that grows in the shelter
of the sage.
Yet the program of sage eradication has been under way for a
number of years. Several government agencies are active in it;
industry has joined with enthusiasm to promote and encourage
an enterprise which creates expanded markets not only for grass
seed but for a large assortment of machines for cutting and
plowing and seeding. e newest addition to the weapons is the
use of chemical sprays. Now millions of acres of sagebrush lands
are sprayed each year.
What are the results? e eventual effects of eliminating sage
and seeding with grass are largely conjectural. Men of long
experience with the ways of the land say that in this country there is better growth of grass between and under the sage than can
possibly be had in pure stands, once the moisture-holding sage is
gone.
But even if the program succeeds in its immediate objective,
it is clear that the whole closely knit fabric of life has been ripped
apart. e antelope and the grouse will disappear along with the
sage. e deer will suffer, too, and the land will be poorer for the
destruction of the wild things that belong to it. Even the livestock
which are the intended beneficiaries will suffer; no amount of lush
green grass in summer can help the sheep starving in the winter
storms for lack of the sage and bitterbrush and other wild
vegetation of the plains.
ese are the first and obvious effects. e second is of a kind
that is always associated with the shotgun approach to nature: the
spraying also eliminates a great many plants that were not its
intended target. Justice William O. Douglas, in his recent book
My Wilderness: East to Katahdin, has told of an appalling example
of ecological destruction wrought by the United States Forest
Service in the Bridger National Forest in Wyoming. Some ,
acres of sagelands were sprayed by the Service, yielding to
pressure of cattlemen for more grasslands. e sage was killed, as
intended. But so was the green, life-giving ribbon of willows that
traced its way across these plains, following the meandering
streams. Moose had lived in these willow thickets, for willow is to
the moose what sage is to the antelope. Beaver had lived there,
too, feeding on the willows, felling them and making a strong dam
across the tiny stream. rough the labor of the beavers, a lake
backed up. Trout in the mountain streams seldom were more
than six inches long; in the lake they thrived so prodigiously that
many grew to five pounds. Waterfowl were attracted to the lake,
also. Merely because of the presence of the willows and the
beavers that depended on them, the region was an attractive
recreational area with excellent fishing and hunting.
But with the improvement instituted by the Forest Service,
the willows went the way of the sagebrush, killed by the same
impartial spray. When Justice Douglas visited the area in ,
the year of the spraying, he was shocked to see the shriveled and
dying willowsthe vast, incredible damage. What would
become of the moose? Of the beavers and the little world they had
constructed? A year later he returned to read the answers in the
devastated landscape. e moose were gone and so were the
beaver. eir principal dam had gone out for want of attention by
its skilled architects, and the lake had drained away. None of the
large trout were left. None could live in the tiny creek that
remained, threading its way through a bare, hot land where no
shade remained. e living world was shattered.
Besides the more than four million acres of rangelands
sprayed each year, tremendous areas of other types of land are
also potential or actual recipients of chemical treatments for weed
control. For example, an area larger than all of New England
some  million acresis under management by utility
corporations and much of it is routinely treated for brush
control. In the Southwest an estimated  million acres of
mesquite lands require management by some means, and
chemical spraying is the method most actively pushed. An
unknown but very large acreage of timber-producing lands is now
aerially sprayed in order to weed out the hardwoods from the
more spray-resistant conifers. Treatment of agricultural lands
with herbicides doubled in the decade following , totaling
million acres in . And the combined acreage of private lawns,
parks, and golf courses now being treated must reach an
astronomical figure.
e chemical weed killers are a bright new toy. ey work in
a spectacular way; they give a giddy sense of power over nature to
those who wield them, and as for the long-range and less obvious
effectsthese are easily brushed aside as the baseless imaginings
of pessimists. e agricultural engineers speak blithely of
chemical plowing in a world that is urged to beat its plowshares
into spray guns. e town fathers of a thousand communities lend
willing ears to the chemical salesman and the eager contractors
who will rid the roadsides of brushfor a price. It is cheaper
than mowing, is the cry. So, perhaps, it appears in the neat rows
of figures in the official books; but were the true costs entered, the
costs not only in dollars but in the many equally valid debits we
shall presently consider, the wholesale broadcasting of chemicals
would be seen to be more costly in dollars as well as infinitely
damaging to the long-range health of the landscape and to all the
varied interests that depend on it.
Take, for instance, that commodity prized by every chamber
of commerce throughout the landthe good will of vacationing
tourists. ere is a steadily growing chorus of outraged protest
about the disfigurement of once beautiful roadsides by chemical
sprays, which substitute a sere expanse of brown, withered
vegetation for the beauty of fern and wildflower, of native shrubs
adorned with blossom or berry. We are making a dirty, brown,
dying-looking mess along the sides of our roads, a New England
woman wrote angrily to her newspaper. is is not what the
tourists expect, with all the money we are spending advertising
the beautiful scenery.
In the summer of  conservationists from many states
converged on a peaceful Maine island to witness its presentation
to the National Audubon Society by its owner, Millicent Todd
Bingham. e focus that day was on the preservation of the
natural landscape and of the intricate web of life whose
interwoven strands lead from microbes to man. But in the
background of all the conversations among the visitors to the
island was indignation at the despoiling of the roads they had
traveled. Once it had been a joy to follow those roads through the
evergreen forests, roads lined with bayberry and sweet fern, alder
and huckleberry. Now all was brown desolation. One of the
conservationists wrote of that August pilgrimage to a Maine
island: I returned  angry at the desecration of the Maine
roadsides. Where, in previous years, the highways were bordered
with wildflowers and attractive shrubs, there were only the scars
of dead vegetation for mile after mile. As an economic
proposition, can Maine afford the loss of tourist goodwill that
such sights induce?
Maine roadsides are merely one example, though a
particularly sad one for those of us who have a deep love for the
beauty of that state, of the senseless destruction that is going on
in the name of roadside brush control throughout the nation.
Botanists at the Connecticut Arboretum declare that the
elimination of beautiful native shrubs and wildflowers has
reached the proportions of a roadside crisis. Azaleas, mountain
laurel, blueberries, huckleberries, viburnums, dogwood, bayberry,
sweet fern, low shadbush, winterberry, chokecherry, and wild
plum are dying before the chemical barrage. So are the daisies,
black-eyed Susans, Queen Annes lace, goldenrods, and fall asters
which lend grace and beauty to the landscape.
e spraying is not only improperly planned but studded with
abuses such as these. In a southern New England town one
contractor finished his work with some chemical remaining in his
tank. He discharged this along woodland roadsides where no
spraying had been authorized. As a result the community lost the
blue and golden beauty of its autumn roads, where asters and
goldenrod would have made a display worth traveling far to see.
In another New England community a contractor changed the
state specifications for town spraying without the knowledge of
the highway department and sprayed roadside vegetation to a
height of eight feet instead of the specified maxi mum of four feet,
leaving a broad, disfiguring, brown swath. In a Massachusetts
community the town officials purchased a weed killer from a
zealous chemical salesman, unaware that it contained arsenic.
One result of the subsequent roadside spraying was the death of
a dozen cows from arsenic poisoning.
Trees within the Connecticut Arboretum Natural Area were
seriously injured when the town of Waterford sprayed the
roadsides with chemical weed killers in . Even large trees not
directly sprayed were affected. e leaves of the oaks began to curl
and turn brown, although it was the season for spring growth.
en new shoots began to be put forth and grew with abnormal
rapidity, giving a weeping appearance to the trees. Two seasons
later, large branches on these trees had died, others were without
leaves, and the deformed, weeping effect of whole trees persisted.
I know well a stretch of road where natures own landscaping
has provided a border of alder, viburnum, sweet fern, and juniper
with seasonally changing accents of bright flowers, or of fruits
hanging in jeweled clusters in the fall. e road had no heavy load
of traffic to support; there were few sharp curves or intersections
where brush could obstruct the drivers vision. But the sprayers
took over and the miles along that road became something to be
traversed quickly, a sight to be endured with ones mind closed to
thoughts of the sterile and hideous world we are letting our
technicians make. But here and there authority had somehow
faltered and by an unaccountable oversight there were oases of
beauty in the midst of austere and regimented controloases that
made the desecration of the greater part of the road the more
unbearable. In such places my spirit lifted to the sight of the drifts
of white clover or the clouds of purple vetch with here and there
the flaming cup of a wood lily.
Such plants are weeds only to those who make a business of
selling and applying chemicals. In a volume of Proceedings of one
of the weed-control conferences that are now regular institutions,
I once read an extraordinary statement of a weed killers
philosophy. e author defended the killing of good plants
simply because they are in bad company. ose who complain
about killing wildflowers along roadsides reminded him, he said,
of antivivisectionists to whom, if one were to judge by their
actions, the life of a stray dog is more sacred than the lives of
children.
To the author of this paper, many of us would unquestionably
be suspect, convicted of some deep perversion of character
because we prefer the sight of the vetch and the clover and the
wood lily in all their delicate and transient beauty to that of
roadsides scorched as by fire, the shrubs brown and brittle, the
bracken that once lifted high its proud lacework now withered
and drooping. We would seem deplorably weak that we can
tolerate the sight of such weeds, that we do not rejoice in their
eradication, that we are not filled with exultation that man has
once more triumphed over miscreant nature.
Justice Douglas tells of attending a meeting of federal field
men who were discussing protests by citizens against plans for the
spraying of sagebrush that I mentioned earlier in this chapter.
ese men considered it hilariously funny that an old lady had
opposed the plan because the wildflowers would be destroyed.
Yet, was not her right to search out a banded cup or a tiger lily as
inalienable as the right of stockmen to search out grass or of a
lumberman to claim a tree? asks this humane and perceptive
jurist. e esthetic values of the wilderness are as much our
inheritance as the veins of copper and gold in our hills and the
forests in our mountains.
ere is of course more to the wish to preserve our roadside
vegetation than even such esthetic considerations. In the
economy of nature the natural vegetation has its essential place.
Hedgerows along country roads and bordering fields provide
food, cover, and nesting areas for birds and homes for many small
animals. Of some  species of shrubs and vines that are typical
roadside species in the eastern states alone, about  are
important to wildlife as food.
Such vegetation is also the habitat of wild bees and other
pollinating insects. Man is more dependent on these wild
pollinators than he usually realizes. Even the farmer himself
seldom understands the value of wild bees and often participates
in the very measures that rob him of their services. Some
agricultural crops and many wild plants are partly or wholly
dependent on the services of the native pollinating insects.
Several hundred species of wild bees take part in the pollination
of cultivated crops species visiting the flowers of alfalfa
alone. Without insect pollination, most of the soil-holding and
soil-enriching plants of uncultivated areas would die out, with far-
reaching consequences to the ecology of the whole region. Many
herbs, shrubs, and trees of forests and range depend on native
insects for their reproduction; without these plants many wild
animals and range stock would find little food. Now clean
cultivation and the chemical destruction of hedgerows and weeds
are eliminating the last sanctuaries of these pollinating insects
and breaking the threads that bind life to life.
ese insects, so essential to our agriculture and indeed to our
landscape as we know it, deserve something better from us than
the senseless destruction of their habitat. Honeybees and wild
bees depend heavily on such weeds as goldenrod, mustard, and
dandelions for pollen that serves as the food of their young. Vetch
furnishes essential spring forage for bees before the alfalfa is in
bloom, tiding them over this early season so that they are ready
to pollinate the alfalfa. In the fall they depend on goldenrod at a
season when no other food is available, to stock up for the winter.
By the precise and delicate timing that is natures own, the
emergence of one species of wild bees takes place on the very day
of the opening of the willow blossoms. ere is no dearth of men
who understand these things, but these are not the men who
order the wholesale drenching of the landscape with chemicals.
And where are the men who supposedly understand the value
of proper habitat for the preservation of wildlife? Too many of
them are to be found defending herbicides as harmless to
wildlife because they are thought to be less toxic than insecticides.
erefore, it is said, no harm is done. But as the herbicides rain
down on forest and field, on marsh and rangeland, they are
bringing about marked changes and even permanent destruction
of wildlife habitat. To destroy the homes and the food of wildlife
is perhaps worse in the long run than direct killing.
e irony of this all-out chemical assault on roadsides and
utility rights-of-way is twofold. It is perpetuating the problem it
seeks to correct, for as experience has clearly shown, the blanket
application of herbicides does not permanently control roadside
brush and the spraying has to be repeated year after year. And
as a further irony, we persist in doing this despite the fact that a
perfectly sound method of selective spraying is known, which can achieve long-term vegetational control and eliminate repeated
spraying in most types of vegetation.
e object of brush control along roads and rights-of-way is
not to sweep the land clear of everything but grass; it is, rather, to
eliminate plants ultimately tall enough to present an obstruction
to drivers vision or interference with wires on rights-of-way. is
means, in general, trees. Most shrubs are low enough to present
no hazard; so, certainly, are ferns and wildflowers.
Selective spraying was developed by Dr. Frank Egler during a
period of years at the American Museum of Natural History as
director of a Committee for Brush Control Recommendations for
Rights-of-Way. It took advantage of the inherent stability of
nature, building on the fact that most communities of shrubs are
strongly resistant to invasion by trees. By comparison, grasslands
are easily invaded by tree seedlings. e object of selective
spraying is not to produce grass on roadsides and rights-of- way
but to eliminate the tall woody plants by direct treatment and to
preserve all other vegetation. One treatment may be sufficient,
with a possible follow-up for extremely resistant species;
thereafter the shrubs assert control and the trees do not return.
e best and cheapest controls for vegetation are not chemicals
but other plants.
e method has been tested in research areas scattered
throughout the eastern United States. Results show that once
properly treated, an area becomes stabilized, requiring no re-
spraying for at least  years. e spraying can often be done by
men on foot, using knapsack sprayers, and having complete
control over their material. Sometimes compressor pumps and
material can be mounted on truck chassis, but there is no blanket
spraying. Treatment is directed only to trees and any
exceptionally tall shrubs that must be eliminated. e integrity of
the environment is thereby preserved, the enormous value of the
wildlife habitat remains intact, and the beauty of shrub and fern
and wildflower has not been sacrificed.
Here and there the method of vegetation management by
selective spraying has been adopted. For the most part,
entrenched custom dies hard and blanket spraying continues to
thrive, to exact its heavy annual costs from the taxpayer, and to
inflict its damage on the ecological web of life. It thrives, surely,
only because the facts are not known. When taxpayers
understand that the bill for spraying the town roads should come
due only once a generation instead of once a year, they will surely
rise up and demand a change of method.
Among the many advantages of selective spraying is the fact
that it minimizes the amount of chemical applied to the
landscape. ere is no broadcasting of material but, rather,
concentrated application to the base of the trees. e potential
harm to wildlife is therefore kept to a minimum.
e most widely used herbicides are ,-D, ,,-T, and
related compounds. Whether or not these are actually toxic is a
matter of controversy. People spraying their lawns with ,-D and
becoming wet with spray have occasionally developed severe
neuritis and even paralysis. Although such incidents are
apparently uncommon, medical authorities advise caution in use
of such compounds. Other hazards, more obscure, may also
attend the use of ,-D. It has been shown experimentally to
disturb the basic physiological process of respiration in the cell,
and to imitate X-rays in damaging the chromosomes. Some very
recent work indicates that reproduction of birds may be adversely
affected by these and certain other herbicides at levels far below
those that cause death.
Apart from any directly toxic effects, curious indirect results
follow the use of certain herbicides. It has been found that
animals, both wild herbivores and livestock, are sometimes
strangely attracted to a plant that has been sprayed, even though
it is not one of their natural foods. If a highly poisonous herbicide
such as arsenic has been used, this intense desire to reach the
wilting vegetation inevitably has disastrous results. Fatal results
may follow, also, from less toxic herbicides if the plant itself
happens to be poisonous or perhaps to possess thorns or burs.
Poisonous range weeds, for example, have suddenly become
attractive to livestock after spraying, and the animals have died
from indulging this unnatural appetite. e literature of
veterinary medicine abounds in similar examples: swine eating
sprayed cockleburs with consequent severe illness, lambs eating
sprayed thistles, bees poisoned by pasturing on mustard sprayed
after it came into bloom. Wild cherry, the leaves of which are
highly poisonous, has exerted a fatal attraction for cattle once its
foliage has been sprayed with ,-D. Apparently the wilting that
follows spraying (or cutting) makes the plant attractive. Ragwort
has provided other examples. Livestock ordinarily avoid this plant
unless forced to turn to it in late winter and early spring by lack
of other forage. However, the animals eagerly feed on it after its
foliage has been sprayed with ,-D.
e explanation of this peculiar behavior sometimes appears
to he in the changes which the chemical brings about in the
metabolism of the plant itself. ere is temporarily a marked
increase in sugar content, making the plant more attractive to
many animals.
Another curious effect of ,-D has important effects for
livestock, wildlife, and apparently for men as well. Experiments
carried out about a decade ago showed that after treatment with
this chemical there is a sharp increase in the nitrate content of
corn and of sugar beets. e same effect was suspected in
sorghum, sunflower, spiderwort, lambs quarters, pigweed, and
smartweed. Some of these are normally ignored by cattle, but are
eaten with relish after treatment with ,-D. A number of deaths
among cattle have been traced to sprayed weeds, according to
some agricultural specialists. e danger lies in the increase in
nitrates, for the peculiar physiology of the ruminant at once poses
a critical problem. Most such animals have a digestive system of
extraordinary complexity, including a stomach divided into four
chambers. e digestion of cellulose is accomplished through the
action of microorganisms (rumen bacteria) in one of the
chambers. When the animal feeds on vegetation containing an
abnormally high level of nitrates, the microorganisms in the
rumen act on the nitrates to change them into highly toxic
nitrites. ereafter a fatal chain of events ensues: the nitrites act
on the blood pigment to form a chocolate-brown substance in
which the oxygen is so firmly held that it cannot take part in
respiration, hence oxygen is not transferred from the lungs to the
tissues. Death occurs within a few hours from anoxia, or lack of
oxygen. e various reports of livestock losses after grazing on
certain weeds treated with ,-D therefore have a logical
explanation. e same danger exists for wild animals belonging
to the group of ruminants, such as deer, antelope, sheep, and
goats.
Although various factors (such as exceptionally dry weather)
can cause an increase in nitrate content, the effect of the soaring
sales and applications of ,-D cannot be ignored. e situation
was considered important enough by the University of Wisconsin
Agricultural Experiment Station to justify a warning in  that
plants killed by ,-D may contain large amounts of nitrate. e
hazard extends to human beings as well as animals and may help
to explain the recent mysterious increase in silo deaths. When
corn, oats, or sorghum containing large amounts of nitrates are
ensiled they release poisonous nitrogen oxide gases, creating a
deadly hazard to anyone entering the silo. Only a few breaths of
one of these gases can cause a diffuse chemical pneumonia. In a
series of such cases studied by the University of Minnesota
Medical School all but one terminated fatally.
Once again we are walking in nature like an elephant in the
china cabinet. So C. J. Briejer, a Dutch scientist of rare
understanding, sums up our use of weed killers. In my opinion
too much is taken for granted. We do not know whether all weeds
in crops are harmful or whether some of them are useful, says
Dr. Briejer.
Seldom is the question asked, What is the relation between
the weed and the soil? Perhaps, even from our narrow standpoint
of direct self-interest, the relation is a useful one. As we have seen,
soil and the living things in and upon it exist in a relation of
interdependence and mutual benefit. Presumably the weed is
taking something from the soil; perhaps it is also contributing
something to it. A practical example was provided recently by the
parks in a city in Holland. e roses were doing badly. Soil
samples showed heavy infestations by tiny nematode worms.
Scientists of the Dutch Plant Protection Service did not
recommend chemical sprays or soil treatments; instead, they
suggested that marigolds be planted among the roses. is plant,
which the purist would doubtless consider a weed in any rosebed,
releases an excretion from its roots that kills the soil nematodes.
e advice was taken; some beds were planted with marigolds,
some left without as controls. e results were striking. With the
aid of the marigolds the roses flourished; in the control beds they
were sickly and drooping. Marigolds are now used in many places
for combating nematodes.
In the same way, and perhaps quite unknown to us, other
plants that we ruthlessly eradicate may be performing a function
that is necessary to the health of the soil. One very useful function
of natural plant communitiesnow pretty generally stigmatized
as weedsis to serve as an indicator of the condition of the soil.
is useful function is of course lost where chemical weed killers
have been used.
ose who find an answer to all problems in spraying also
overlook a matter of great scientific importancethe need to
preserve some natural plant communities. We need these as a
standard against which we can measure the changes our own
activities bring about. We need them as wild habitats in which
original populations of insects and other organisms can be
maintained, for, as will be explained in Chapter , the
development of resistance to insecticides is changing the genetic
factors of insects and perhaps other organisms. One scientist has
even suggested that some sort of zoo should be established to
preserve insects, mites, and the like, before their genetic
composition is further changed.
Some experts warn of subtle but far-reaching vegetational
shifts as a result of the growing use of herbicides. e chemical
,-D, by killing out the broad-leaved plants, allows the grasses to
thrive in the reduced competitionnow some of the grasses
themselves have become weeds, presenting a new problem in
control and giving the cycle another turn. is strange situation
is acknowledged in a recent issue of a journal devoted to crop
problems: With the widespread use of ,-D to control broad-
leaved weeds, grass weeds in particular have increasingly become
a threat to corn and soybean yields.
Ragweed, the bane of hay fever sufferers, offers an interesting
example of the way efforts to control nature sometimes
boomerang. Many thousands of gallons of chemicals have been
discharged along roadsides in the name of ragweed control. But
the unfortunate truth is that blanket spraying is resulting in more
ragweed, not less. Ragweed is an annual; its seedlings require open
soil to become established each year. Our best protection against
this plant is therefore the maintenance of dense shrubs, ferns, and
other perennial vegetation. Spraying frequently destroys this
protective vegetation and creates open, barren areas which the
ragweed hastens to fill. It is probable, moreover, that the pollen
content of the atmosphere is not related to roadside ragweed, but
to the ragweed of city lots and fallow fields.
e booming sales of chemical crabgrass killers are another
example of how readily unsound methods catch on. ere is a
cheaper and better way to remove crabgrass than to attempt year
after year to kill it out with chemicals. is is to give it
competition of a kind it cannot survive, the competition of other
grass. Crabgrass exists only in an unhealthy lawn. It is a symptom,
not a disease in itself. By providing a fertile soil and giving the
desired grasses a good start, it is possible to create an
environment in which crabgrass cannot grow, for it requires open
space in which it can start from seed year after year.
Instead of treating the basic condition, suburbanitesadvised
by nurserymen who in turn have been advised by the chemical
manufacturerscontinue to apply truly astonishing amounts of
crabgrass killers to their lawns each year. Marketed under trade
names which give no hint of their nature, many of these
preparations contain such poisons as mercury, arsenic, and
chlordane. Application at the recommended rates leaves
tremendous amounts of these chemicals on the lawn. Users of one
product, for example, apply  pounds of technical chlordane to
the acre if they follow directions. If they use another of the many
available products, they are applying  pounds of metallic
arsenic to the acre. e toll of dead birds, as we shall see in
Chapter , is distressing. How lethal these lawns may be for
human beings is unknown.
e success of selective spraying for roadside and right-of-
way vegetation, where it has been practiced, offers hope that
equally sound ecological methods may be developed for other
vegetation programs for farms, forests, and rangesmethods
aimed not at destroying a particular species but at managing
vegetation as a living community.
Other solid achievements show what can be done. Biological
control has achieved some of its most spectacular successes in the
area of curbing unwanted vegetation. Nature herself has met
many of the problems that now beset us, and she has usually
solved them in her own successful way. Where man has been
intelligent enough to observe and to emulate Nature he, too, is
often rewarded with success.
An outstanding example in the field of controlling unwanted
plants is the handling of the Klamath-weed problem in California.
Although the Klamath weed, or goatweed, is a native of Europe
(where it is called St. Johnswort), it accompanied man in his
westward migrations, first appearing in the United States in
near Lancaster, Pennsylvania. By  it had reached California
in the vicinity of the Klamath River, hence the name locally given
to it. By  it had occupied about , acres of rangeland,
and by  it had invaded some two and one half million acres.
Klamath weed, quite unlike such native plants as sagebrush,
has no place in the ecology of the region, and no animals or other
plants require its presence. On the contrary, wherever it appeared
livestock became scabby, sore-mouthed, and unthrifty from
feeding on this toxic plant. Land values declined accordingly, for
the Klamath weed was considered to hold the first mortgage.
In Europe the Klamath weed, or St. Johnswort, has never
become a problem because along with the plant there have
developed various species of insects; these feed on it so
extensively that its abundance is severely limited. In particular,
two species of beetles in southern France, pea-sized and of
metallic color, have their whole beings so adapted to the presence
of the weed that they feed and reproduce only upon it.
It was an event of historic importance when the first
shipments of these beetles were brought to the United States in
, for this was the first attempt in North America to control a
plant with a plant-eating insect. By  both species had become
so well established that no further importations were needed.
eir spread was accomplished by collecting beetles from the
original colonies and redistributing them at the rate of millions a
year. Within small areas the beetles accomplish their own
dispersion, moving on as soon as the Klamath weed dies out and
locating new stands with great precision. And as the beetles thin
out the weed, desirable range plants that have been crowded out
are able to return.
A ten-year survey completed in  showed that control of
the Klamath weed had been more effective than hoped for even
by enthusiasts, with the weed reduced to a mere  per cent of its
former abundance. is token infestation is harmless and is
actually needed in order to maintain a population of beetles as
protection against a future increase in the weed.
Another extraordinarily successful and economical example
of weed control may be found in Australia. With the colonists
usual taste for carrying plants or animals into a new country, a
Captain Arthur Phillip had brought various species of cactus into
Australia about , intending to use them in culturing
cochineal insects for dye. Some of the cacti or prickly pears
escaped from his gardens and by  about  species could be
found growing wild. Having no natural controls in this new
territory, they spread prodigiously, eventually occupying about
million acres. At least half of this land was so densely covered as
to be useless.
In  Australian entomologists were sent to North and
South America to study insect enemies of the prickly pears in
their native habitat. After trials of several species,  billion eggs of
an Argentine moth were released in Australia in . Seven years
later the last dense growth of the prickly pear had been destroyed
and the once uninhabitable areas reopened to settlement and
grazing. e whole operation had cost less than a penny per acre.
In contrast, the unsatisfactory attempts at chemical control in
earlier years had cost about PS per acre.
Both of these examples suggest that extremely effective
control of many kinds of unwanted vegetation might be achieved
by paying more attention to the role of plant-eating insects. e
science of range management has largely ignored this possibility,
although these insects are perhaps the most selective of all grazers
and their highly restricted diets could easily be turned to mans
advantage.
