AS MAN PROCEEDS toward his announced goal of the
conquest of nature, he has written a depressing record of
destruction, directed not only against the earth he inhabits but
against the life that shares it with him. e history of the recent
centuries has its black passagesthe slaughter of the buffalo on
the western plains, the massacre of the shorebirds by the market
gunners, the near-extermination of the egrets for their plumage.
Now, to these and others like them, we are adding a new chapter
and a new kind of havocthe direct killing of birds, mammals,
fishes, and indeed practically every form of wildlife by chemical
insecticides indiscriminately sprayed on the land.
Under the philosophy that now seems to guide our destinies,
nothing must get in the way of the man with the spray gun. e
incidental victims of his crusade against insects count as nothing;
if robins, pheasants, raccoons, cats, or even livestock happen to
inhabit the same bit of earth as the target insects and to be hit by
the rain of insect-killing poisons no one must protest.
e citizen who wishes to make a fair judgment of the
question of wildlife loss is today confronted with a dilemma. On
the one hand conservationists and many wildlife biologists assert
that the losses have been severe and in some cases even
catastrophic. On the other hand the control agencies tend to deny
flatly and categorically that such losses have occurred, or that they
are of any importance if they have. Which view are we to accept?
e credibility of the witness is of first importance. e
professional wildlife biologist on the scene is certainly best
qualified to discover and interpret wildlife loss. e entomologist,
whose specialty is insects, is not so qualified by training, and is
not psychologically disposed to look for undesirable side effects
of his control program. Yet it is the control men in state and
federal governmentsand of course the chemical
manufacturerswho steadfastly deny the facts reported by the
biologists and declare they see little evidence of harm to wildlife.
Like the priest and the Levite in the biblical story, they choose to
pass by on the other side and to see nothing. Even if we charitably
explain their denials as due to the shortsightedness of the
specialist and the man with an interest this does not mean we
must accept them as qualified witnesses.
e best way to form our own judgment is to look at some of
the major control programs and learn, from observers familiar
with the ways of wildlife, and unbiased in favor of chemicals, just
what has happened in the wake of a rain of poison falling from the
skies into the world of wildlife.
To the bird watcher, the suburbanite who derives joy from
birds in his garden, the hunter, the fisherman or the explorer of
wild regions, anything that destroys the wildlife of an area for
even a single year has deprived him of pleasure to which he has a
legitimate right. is is a valid point of view. Even if, as has
sometimes happened, some of the birds and mammals and fishes
are able to re-establish themselves after a single spraying, a great
and real harm has been done.
But such re-establishment is unlikely to happen. Spraying
tends to be repetitive, and a single exposure from which the
wildlife populations might have a chance to recover is a rarity.
What usually results is a poisoned environment, a lethal trap in
which not only the resident populations succumb but those who
come in as migrants as well. e larger the area sprayed the more
serious the harm, because no oases of safety remain. Now, in a
decade marked by insect-control programs in which many
thousands or even millions of acres are sprayed as a unit, a decade
in which private and community spraying has also surged steadily
upward, a record of destruction and death of American wildlife
has accumulated. Let us look at some of these programs and see
what has happened.
During the fall of  some , acres in southeastern
Michigan, including numerous suburbs of Detroit, were heavily
dusted from the air with pellets of aldrin, one of the most
dangerous of all the chlorinated hydrocarbons. e program was
conducted by the Michigan Department of Agriculture with the
cooperation of the United States Department of Agriculture; its
announced purpose was control of the Japanese beetle.
Little need was shown for this drastic and dangerous action.
On the contrary, Walter P. Nickell, one of the best-known and
best-informed naturalists in the state, who spends much of his
time in the field with long periods in southern Michigan every
summer, declared: For more than thirty years, to my direct
knowledge, the Japanese beetle has been present in the city of
Detroit in small numbers. e numbers have not shown any
appreciable increase in all this lapse of years. I have yet to see a
single Japanese beetle [in ] other than the few caught in
Government catch traps in Detroit  Everything is being kept so
secret that I have not yet been able to obtain any information
whatsoever to the effect that they have increased in numbers.
An official release by the state agency merely declared that
the beetle had put in its appearance in the areas designated for
the aerial attack upon it. Despite the lack of justification the
program was launched, with the state providing the manpower
and supervising the operation, the federal government providing
equipment and additional men, and the communities paying for
the insecticide.
e Japanese beetle, an insect accidentally imported into the
United States, was discovered in New Jersey in , when a few
shiny beetles of a metallic green color were seen in a nursery near
Riverton. e beetles, at first unrecognized, were finally identified
as a common inhabitant of the main islands of Japan. Apparently
they had entered the United States on nursery stock imported
before restrictions were established in .
From its original point of entrance the Japanese beetle has
spread rather widely throughout many of the states east of the
Mississippi, where conditions of temperature and rainfall are
suitable for it. Each year some outward movement beyond the
existing boundaries of its distribution usually takes place. In the
eastern areas where the beetles have been longest established,
attempts have been made to set up natural controls. Where this
has been done, the beetle populations have been kept at relatively
low levels, as many records attest.
Despite the record of reasonable control in eastern areas, the
midwestern states now on the fringe of the beetles range have
launched an attack worthy of the most deadly enemy instead of
only a moderately destructive insect, employing the most
dangerous chemicals distributed in a manner that exposes large
numbers of people, their domestic animals, and all wildlife to the
poison intended for the beetle. As a result these Japanese beetle
programs have caused shocking destruction of animal life and
have exposed human beings to undeniable hazard. Sections of
Michigan, Kentucky, Iowa, Indiana, Illinois, and Missouri are all
experiencing a rain of chemicals in the name of beetle control.
e Michigan spraying was one of the first large-scale attacks
on the Japanese beetle from the air. e choice of aldrin, one of
the deadliest of all chemicals, was not determined by any peculiar
suitability for Japanese beetle control, but simply by the wish to
save moneyaldrin was the cheapest of the compounds available.
While the state in its official release to the press acknowledged
that aldrin is a poison, it implied that no harm could come to
human beings in the heavily populated areas to which the
chemical was applied. (e official answer to the query What
precautions should I take? was For you, none.) An official of
the Federal Aviation Agency was later quoted in the local press to
the effect that this is a safe operation and a representative of the
Detroit Department of Parks and Recreation added his assurance
that the dust is harmless to humans and will not hurt plants or
pets. One must assume that none of these officials had consulted
the published and readily available reports of the United States
Public Health Service, the Fish and Wildlife Service, and other
evidence of the extremely poisonous nature of aldrin.
Acting under the Michigan pest control law which allows the
state to spray indiscriminately without notifying or gaining
permission of individual landowners, the low-lying planes began
to fly over the Detroit area. e city authorities and the Federal
Aviation Agency were immediately besieged by calls from
worried citizens. After receiving nearly  calls in a single hour,
the police begged radio and television stations and newspapers to
tell the watchers what they were seeing and advise them it was
safe, according to the Detroit News. e Federal Aviation Agencys safety officer assured the public that the planes are
carefully supervised and are authorized to fly low. In a
somewhat mistaken attempt to allay fears, he added that the
planes had emergency valves that would allow them to dump
their entire load instantaneously. is, fortunately, was not done,
but as the planes went about their work the pellets of insecticide
fell on beetles and humans alike, showers of harmless poison
descending on people shopping or going to work and on children
out from school for the lunch hour. Housewives swept the
granules from porches and sidewalks, where they are said to have
looked like snow. As pointed out later by the Michigan
Audubon Society, In the spaces between shingles on roofs, in
eaves-troughs, in the cracks in bark and twigs, the little white
pellets of aldrin-and-clay, no bigger than a pin head, were lodged
by the millions  When the snow and rain came, every puddle
became a possible death potion.
Within a few days after the dusting operation, the Detroit
Audubon Society began receiving calls about the birds. According
to the Societys secretary, Mrs. Ann Boyes, e first indication
that the people were concerned about the spray was a call I
received on Sunday morning from a woman who reported that
coming home from church she saw an alarming number of dead
and dying birds. e spraying there had been done on ursday.
She said there were no birds at all flying in the area, that she had
found at least a dozen [dead] in her backyard and that the
neighbors had found dead squirrels. All other calls received by
Mrs. Boyes that day reported a great many dead birds and no live
ones  People who had maintained bird feeders said there were
no birds at all at their feeders. Birds picked up in a dying
condition showed the typical symptoms of insecticide
poisoningtremoring, loss of ability to fly, paralysis, convulsions.
Nor were birds the only forms of life immediately affected. A
local veterinarian reported that his office was full of clients with
dogs and cats that had suddenly sickened. Cats, who so
meticulously groom their coats and lick their paws, seemed to be
most affected. eir illness took the form of severe diarrhea,
vomiting, and convulsions. e only advice the veterinarian could
give his clients was not to let the animals out unnecessarily, or to
wash the paws promptly if they did so. (But the chlorinated
hydrocarbons cannot be washed even from fruits or vegetables, so
little protection could be expected from this measure.)
Despite the insistence of the City-County Health
Commissioner that the birds must have been killed by some
other kind of spraying and that the outbreak of throat and chest
irritations that followed the exposure to aldrin must have been
due to something else, the local Health Department received a
constant stream of complaints. A prominent Detroit internist was
called upon to treat four of his patients within an hour after they
had been exposed while watching the planes at work. All had
similar symptoms: nausea, vomiting, chills, fever, extreme fatigue,
and coughing.
e Detroit experience has been repeated in many other
communities as pressure has mounted to combat the Japanese
beetle with chemicals. At Blue Island, Illinois, hundreds of dead
and dying birds were picked up. Data collected by birdbanders
here suggest that  per cent of the songbirds were sacrificed. In
Joliet, Illinois, some  acres were treated with heptachlor in
. According to reports from a local sportsmens club, the bird
population within the treated area was virtually wiped out. Dead
rabbits, muskrats, opossums, and fish were also found in
numbers, and one of the local schools made the collection of
insecticide-poisoned birds a science project.
Perhaps no community has suffered more for the sake of a
beetleless world than Sheldon, in eastern Illinois, and adjacent
areas in Iroquois County. In  the United States Department
of Agriculture and the Illinois Agriculture Department began a
program to eradicate the Japanese beetle along the line of its
advance into Illinois, holding out the hope, and indeed the
assurance, that intensive spraying would destroy the populations
of the invading insect. e first eradication took place that year,
when dieldrin was applied to  acres by air. Another
acres were treated similarly in , and the task was presumably
considered complete. But more and more chemical treatments
were called for, and by the end of  some , acres had
been covered. Even in the first years of the program it was
apparent that heavy losses were occurring among wildlife and
domestic animals. e chemical treatments were continued,
nevertheless, without consultation with either the United States
Fish and Wildlife Service or the Illinois Game Management
Division. (In the spring of , however, officials of the federal
Department of Agriculture appeared before a congressional
committee in opposition to a bill that would require just such
prior consultation. ey declared blandly that the bill was
unnecessary because cooperation and consultation were usual.
ese officials were quite unable to recall situations where
cooperation had not taken place at the Washington level. In the
same hearings they stated clearly their unwillingness to consult
with state fish and game departments.)
Although funds for chemical control came in never-ending
streams, the biologists of the Illinois Natural History Survey who
attempted to measure the damage to wildlife had to operate on a
financial shoestring. A mere  was available for the
employment of a field assistant in  and no special funds were
provided in . Despite these crippling difficulties, the
biologists assembled facts that collectively paint a picture of
almost unparalleled wildlife destructiondestruction that
became obvious as soon as the program got under way.
Conditions were made to order for poisoning insect-eating
birds, both in the poisons used and in the events set in motion by
their application. In the early programs at Sheldon, dieldrin was
applied at the rate of  pounds to the acre. To understand its effect
on birds one need only remember that in laboratory experiments
on quail dieldrin has proved to be about  times as poisonous as
DDT. e poison spread over the landscape at Sheldon was
therefore roughly equivalent to  pounds of DDT per acre! And
this was a minimum, because there seems to have been some
overlapping of treatments along field borders and in corners.
As the chemical penetrated the soil the poisoned beetle grubs
crawled out on the surface of the ground, where they remained
for some time before they died, attractive to insect-eating birds.
Dead and dying insects of various species were conspicuous for
about two weeks after the treatment. e effect on the bird
populations could easily have been foretold. Brown thrashers,
starlings, meadowlarks, grackles, and pheasants were virtually
wiped out. Robins were almost annihilated, according to the
biologists report. Dead earthworms had been seen in numbers
after a gentle rain; probably the robins had fed on the poisoned
worms. For other birds, too, the once beneficial rain had been
changed, through the evil power of the poison introduced into
their world, into an agent of destruction. Birds seen drinking and
bathing in puddles left by rain a few days after the spraying were
inevitably doomed.
e birds that survived may have been rendered sterile.
Although a few nests were found in the treated area, a few with
eggs, none contained young birds.
Among the mammals ground squirrels were virtually
annihilated; their bodies were found in attitudes characteristic of
violent death by poisoning. Dead muskrats were found in the
treated areas, dead rabbits in the fields. e fox squirrel had been
a relatively common animal in the town; after the spraying it was
gone.
It was a rare farm in the Sheldon area that was blessed by the
presence of a cat after the war on beetles was begun. Ninety per
cent of all the farm cats fell victims to the dieldrin during the first
season of spraying. is might have been predicted because of the
black record of these poisons in other places. Cats are extremely
sensitive to all insecticides and especially so, it seems, to dieldrin.
In western Java in the course of the antimalarial program carried
out by the World Health Organization, many cats are reported to
have died. In central Java so many were killed that the price of a
cat more than doubled. Similarly, the World Health
Organization, spraying in Venezuela, is reported to have reduced
cats to the status of a rare animal.
In Sheldon it was not only the wild creatures and the
domestic companions that were sacrificed in the campaign
against an insect. Observations on several flocks of sheep and a
herd of beef cattle are indicative of the poisoning and death that
threatened livestock as well. e Natural History Survey report
describes one of these episodes as follows:
e sheep  were driven into a small, untreated bluegrass
pasture across a gravel road from a field which had been treated
with dieldrin spray on May . Evidently some spray had drifted
across the road into the pasture, for the sheep began to show
symptoms of intoxication almost at once  ey lost interest in
food and displayed extreme restlessness, following the pasture
fence around and around apparently searching for a way
out[ey] refused to be driven, bleated almost continuously,
and stood with their heads lowered; they were finally carried from
the pasture  ey displayed great desire for water. Two of the
sheep were found dead in the stream passing through the pasture,
and the remaining sheep were repeatedly driven out of the
stream, several having to be dragged forcibly from the water.
ree of the sheep eventually died; those remaining recovered to
all outward appearances.
is, then, was the picture at the end of . Although the
chemical war went on in succeeding years, the trickle of research
funds dried up completely. Requests for money for wildlife-
insecticide research were included in annual budgets submitted
to the Illinois legislature by the Natural History Survey, but were
invariably among the first items to be eliminated. It was not until
that money was somehow found to pay the expenses of one
field assistantto do work that could easily have occupied the
time of four men.
e desolate picture of wildlife loss had changed little when
the biologists resumed the studies broken off in . In the
meantime, the chemical had been changed to the even more toxic
aldrin,  to  times as toxic as DDT in tests on quail. By ,
every species of wild mammal known to inhabit the area had
suffered losses. It was even worse with the birds. In the small town
of Donovan the robins had been wiped out, as had the grackles,
starlings, and brown thrashers. ese and many other birds were
sharply reduced elsewhere. Pheasant hunters felt the effects of the
beetle campaign sharply. e number of broods produced on
treated lands fell off by some  per cent, and the number of
young in a brood declined. Pheasant hunting, which had been
good in these areas in former years, was virtually abandoned as
unrewarding.
In spite of the enormous havoc that had been wrought in the
name of eradicating the Japanese beetle, the treatment of more
than , acres in Iroquois County over an eight-year period
seems to have resulted in only temporary suppression of the
insect, which continues its westward movement. e full extent
of the toll that has been taken by this largely ineffective program
may never be known, for the results measured by the Illinois
biologists are a minimum figure. If the research program had been
adequately financed to permit full coverage, the destruction
revealed would have been even more appalling. But in the eight
years of the program, only about  was provided for
biological field studies. Meanwhile the federal government had
spent about , for control work and additional thousands
had been provided by the state. e amount spent for research
was therefore a small fraction of  per cent of the outlay for the
chemical program.
ese midwestern programs have been conducted in a spirit
of crisis, as though the advance of the beetle presented an extreme
peril justifying any means to combat it. is of course is a
distortion of the facts, and if the communities that have endured
these chemical drenchings had been familiar with the earlier
history of the Japanese beetle in the United States they would
surely have been less acquiescent.
e eastern states, which had the good fortune to sustain their
beetle invasion in the days before the synthetic insecticides had
been invented, have not only survived the invasion but have
brought the insect under control by means that represented no
threat whatever to other forms of life. ere has been nothing
comparable to the Detroit or Sheldon sprayings in the East. e
effective methods there involved the bringing into play of natural
forces of control which have the multiple advantages of
permanence and environmental safety.
During the first dozen years after its entry into the United
States, the beetle increased rapidly, free of the restraints that in
its native land hold it in check. But by  it had become a pest
of only minor importance throughout much of the territory over
which it had spread. Its decline was largely a consequence of the
importation of parasitic insects from the Far East and of the
establishment of disease organisms fatal to it.
Between  and , as a result of diligent searching
throughout the native range of the beetle, some  species of
predatory or parasitic insects had been imported from the Orient
in an effort to establish natural control. Of these, five became well
established in the eastern United States. e most effective and
widely distributed is a parasitic wasp from Korea and China,
Tiphia vernalis. e female Tiphia, finding a beetle grub in the
soil, injects a paralyzing fluid and attaches a single egg to the
undersurface of the grub. e young wasp, hatching as a larva,
feeds on the paralyzed grub and destroys it. In some  years,
colonies of Tiphia were introduced into  eastern states in a
cooperative program of state and federal agencies. e wasp
became widely established in this area and is generally credited by
entomologists with an important role in bringing the beetle under
control.
An even more important role has been played by a bacterial
disease that affects beetles of the family to which the Japanese
beetle belongsthe scarabaeids. It is a highly specific organism,
attacking no other type of insects, harmless to earthworms,
warm-blooded animals, and plants. e spores of the disease
occur in soil. When ingested by a foraging beetle grub they
multiply prodigiously in its blood, causing it to turn an
abnormally white color, hence the popular name, milky disease.
Milky disease was discovered in New Jersey in . By
it was rather widely prevalent in the older areas of Japanese beetle
infestation. In  a control program was launched, directed at
speeding up the spread of the disease. No method had been
developed for growing the disease organism in an artificial
medium, but a satisfactory substitute was evolved; infected grubs
are ground up, dried, and combined with chalk. In the standard
mixture a gram of dust contains  million spores. Between
and  some , acres in  eastern states were treated in a
cooperative federal-state program; other areas on federal lands
were treated; and an unknown but extensive area was treated by
private organizations or individuals. By , milky spore disease
was raging among the beetle populations of Connecticut, New
York, New Jersey, Delaware, and Maryland. In some test areas
infection of grubs had reached as high as  per cent. e
distribution program was discontinued as a governmental
enterprise in  and production was taken over by a private
laboratory, which continues to supply individuals, garden clubs,
citizens associations, and all others interested in beetle control.
e eastern areas where this program was carried out now
enjoy a high degree of natural protection from the beetle. e
organism remains viable in the soil for years and therefore be
comes to all intents and purposes permanently established,
increasing in effectiveness, and being continuously spread by
natural agencies.
Why, then, with this impressive record in the East, were the
same procedures not tried in Illinois and the other midwestern
states where the chemical battle of the beetles is now being waged with such fury?
We are told that inoculation with milky spore disease is too
expensivealthough no one found it so in the  eastern states
in the s. And by what sort of accounting was the too
expensive judgment reached? Certainly not by any that assessed
the true costs of the total destruction wrought by such programs
as the Sheldon spraying. is judgment also ignores the fact that
inoculation with the spores need be done only once; the first cost
is the only cost.
We are told also that milky spore disease cannot be used on
the periphery of the beetles range because it can be established
only where a large grub population is already present in the soil.
Like many other statements in support of spraying, this one needs
to be questioned. e bacterium that causes milky spore disease
has been found to infect at least  other species of beetles which
collectively have quite a wide distribution and would in all
probability serve to establish the disease even where the Japanese
beetle population is very small or nonexistent. Furthermore,
because of the long viability of the spores in soil they can be
introduced even in the complete absence of grubs, as on the fringe
of the present beetle infestation, there to await the advancing
population.
ose who want immediate results, at whatever cost, will
doubtless continue to use chemicals against the beetle. So will
those who favor the modern trend to built-in obsolescence, for
chemical control is self-perpetuating, needing frequent and costly
repetition.
On the other hand, those who are willing to wait an extra
season or two for full results will turn to milky disease; they will
be rewarded with lasting control that becomes more, rather than
less effective with the passage of time.
An extensive program of research is under way in the United
States Department of Agriculture laboratory at Peoria, Illinois, to
find a way to culture the organism of milky disease on an artificial
medium. is will greatly reduce its cost and should encourage its
more extensive use. After years of work, some success has now
been reported. When this breakthrough is thoroughly
established perhaps some sanity and perspective will be restored
to our dealings with the Japanese beetle, which at the peak of its
depredations never justified the nightmare excesses of some of
these midwestern programs.
Incidents like the eastern Illinois spraying raise a question that
is not only scientific but moral. e question is whether any
civilization can wage relentless war on life without destroying
itself, and without losing the right to be called civilized.
ese insecticides are not selective poisons; they do not single
out the one species of which we desire to be rid. Each of them is
used for the simple reason that it is a deadly poison. It therefore
poisons all life with which it comes in contact: the cat beloved of
some family, the farmers cattle, the rabbit in the field, and the
horned lark out of the sky. ese creatures are innocent of any
harm to man. Indeed, by their very existence they and their
fellows make his life more pleasant. Yet he rewards them with a
death that is not only sudden but horrible. Scientific observers at
Sheldon described the symptoms of a meadowlark found near
death: Although it lacked muscular coordination and could not
fly or stand, it continued to beat its wings and clutch with its toes
while lying on its side. Its beak was held open and breathing was
labored. Even more pitiful was the mute testimony of the dead
ground squirrels, which exhibited a characteristic attitude in
death. e back was bowed, and the forelegs with the toes of the
feet tightly clenched were drawn close to the thorax  e head
and neck were outstretched and the mouth often contained din,
suggesting that the dying animal had been biting at the ground.
By acquiescing in an act that can cause such suffering to a
living creature, who among us is not diminished as a human
being?
