OVER INCREASINGLY large areas of the United States, spring
now comes unheralded by the return of the birds, and the early
mornings are strangely silent where once they were filled with the
beauty of bird song. is sudden silencing of the song of birds,
this obliteration of the color and beauty and interest they lend to
our world have come about swiftly, insidiously, and unnoticed by
those whose communities are as yet unaffected.
From the town of Hinsdale, Illinois, a housewife wrote in
despair to one of the worlds leading ornithologists, Robert
Cushman Murphy, Curator Emeritus of Birds at the American
Museum of Natural History.
Here in our village the elm trees have been sprayed for several
years [she wrote in ]. When we moved here six years ago,
there was a wealth of bird life; I put up a feeder and had a steady
stream of cardinals, chickadees, downies and nuthatches all
winter, and the cardinals and chickadees brought their young
ones in the summer.
After several years of DDT spray, the town is almost devoid of
robins and starlings; chickadees have not been on my shelf for two
years, and this year the cardinals are gone too; the nesting
population in the neighborhood seems to consist of one dove pair
and perhaps one catbird family.
It is hard to explain to the children that the birds have been
killed off, when they have learned in school that a Federal law
protects the birds from killing or capture. Will they ever come
back? they ask, and I do not have the answer. e elms are still
dying, and so are the birds. Is anything being done? Can anything
be done? Can I do anything?
A year after the federal government had launched a massive
spraying program against the fire ant, an Alabama woman wrote:
Our place has been a veritable bird sanctuary for over half a
century. Last July we all remarked, ere are more birds than
ever. en, suddenly, in the second week of August, they all
disappeared. I was accustomed to rising early to care for my
favorite mare that had a young filly. ere was not a sound of the
song of a bird. It was eerie, terrifying. What was man doing to our
perfect and beautiful world? Finally, five months later a blue jay
appeared and a wren.
e autumn months to which she referred brought other
somber reports from the deep South, where in Mississippi,
Louisiana, and Alabama the Field Notes published quarterly by
the National Audubon Society and the United States Fish and
Wildlife Service noted the striking phenomenon of blank spots
weirdly empty of virtually all bird life. e Field Notes are a compilation of the reports of seasoned observers who have spent
many years afield in their particular areas and have unparalleled
knowledge of the normal bird life of the region. One such
observer reported that in driving about southern Mississippi that
fall she saw no land birds at all for long distances. Another in
Baton Rouge reported that the contents of her feeders had lain
untouched for weeks on end, while fruiting shrubs in her yard,
that ordinarily would be stripped clean by that time, still were
laden with berries. Still another reported that his picture window,
which often used to frame a scene splashed with the red of  or
cardinals and crowded with other species, seldom permitted a
view of as many as a bird or two at a time. Professor Maurice
Brooks of the University of West Virginia, an authority on the
birds of the Appalachian region, reported that the West Virginia
bird population had undergone an incredible reduction.
One story might serve as the tragic symbol of the fate of the
birdsa fate that has already overtaken some species, and that
threatens all. It is the story of the robin, the bird known to
everyone. To millions of Americans, the seasons first robin
means that the grip of winter is broken. Its coming is an event
reported in newspapers and told eagerly at the breakfast table.
And as the number of migrants grows and the first mists of green
appear in the woodlands, thousands of people listen for the first
dawn chorus of the robins throbbing in the early morning light.
But now all is changed, and not even the return of the birds may
be taken for granted.
e survival of the robin, and indeed of many other species
as well, seems fatefully linked with the American elm, a tree that
is part of the history of thousands of towns from the Atlantic to
the Rockies, gracing their streets and their village squares and
college campuses with majestic archways of green. Now the elms
are stricken with a disease that afflicts them throughout their
range, a disease so serious that many experts believe all efforts to
save the elms will in the end be futile. It would be tragic to lose
the elms, but it would be doubly tragic if, in vain efforts to save
them, we plunge vast segments of our bird populations into the
night of extinction. Yet this is precisely what is threatened.
e so-called Dutch elm disease entered the United States
from Europe about  in elm burl logs imported for the veneer
industry. It is a fungus disease; the organism invades the water-
conducting vessels of the tree, spreads by spores carried in the
flow of sap, and by its poisonous secretions as well as by
mechanical clogging causes the branches to wilt and the tree to
die. e disease is spread from diseased to healthy trees by elm
bark beetles. e galleries which the insects have tunneled out
under the bark of dead trees become contaminated with spores of
the invading fungus, and the spores adhere to the insect body and
are carried wherever the beetle flies. Efforts to control the fungus
disease of the elms have been directed largely toward control of
the carrier insect. In community after community, especially
throughout the strongholds of the American elm, the Midwest
and New England, intensive spraying has become a routine
procedure.
What this spraying could mean to bird life, and especially to
the robin, was first made clear by the work of two ornithologists
at Michigan State University, Professor George Wallace and one
of his graduate students, John Mehner. When Mr. Mehner began
work for the doctorate in , he chose a research project that
had to do with robin populations. is was quite by chance, for at
that time no one suspected that the robins were in danger. But
even as he undertook the work, events occurred that were to
change its character and indeed to deprive him of his material.
Spraying for Dutch elm disease began in a small way on the
university campus in . e following year the city of East
Lansing (where the university is located) joined in, spraying on
the campus was expanded, and, with local programs for gypsy
moth and mosquito control also under way, the rain of chemicals
increased to a downpour.
During , the year of the first light spraying, all seemed
well. e following spring the migrating robins began to return to
the campus as usual. Like the bluebells in Tomlinsons haunting
essay e Lost Wood, they were expecting no evil as they
reoccupied their familiar territories. But soon it became evident
that something was wrong. Dead and dying robins began to
appear on the campus. Few birds were seen in their normal
foraging activities or assembling in their usual roosts. Few nests
were built; few young appeared. e pattern was repeated with
monotonous regularity in succeeding springs. e sprayed area
had become a lethal trap in which each wave of migrating robins
would be eliminated in about a week. en new arrivals would
come in, only to add to the numbers of doomed birds seen on the
campus in the agonized tremors that precede death.
e campus is serving as a graveyard for most of the robins
that attempt to take up residence in the spring, said Dr. Wallace.
But why? At first he suspected some disease of the nervous
system, but soon it became evident that in spite of the assurances
of the insecticide people that their sprays were harmless to birds
the robins were really dying of insecticidal poisoning; they
exhibited the well-known symptoms of loss of balance, followed
by tremors, convulsions, and death.
Several facts suggested that the robins were being poisoned,
not so much by direct contact with the insecticides as indirectly,
by eating earthworms. Campus earthworms had been fed
inadvertently to crayfish in a research project and all the crayfish
had promptly died. A snake kept in a laboratory cage had gone
into violent tremors after being fed such worms. And earthworms
are the principal food of robins in the spring.
A key piece in the jigsaw puzzle of the doomed robins was
soon to be supplied by Dr. Roy Barker of the Illinois Natural
History Survey at Urbana. Dr. Barkers work, published in ,
traced the intricate cycle of events by which the robins fate is
linked to the elm trees by way of the earthworms. e trees are
sprayed in the spring (usually at the rate of  to  pounds of DDT
per -foot tree, which may be the equivalent of as much as
pounds per acre where elms are numerous) and often again in
July, at about half this concentration. Powerful sprayers direct a
stream of poison to all parts of the tallest trees, killing directly not
only the target organism, the bark beetle, but other insects,
including pollinating species and predatory spiders and beetles.
e poison forms a tenacious film over the leaves and bark. Rains
do not wash it away. In the autumn the leaves fall to the ground,
accumulate in sodden layers, and begin the slow process of
becoming one with the soil. In this they are aided by the toil of the
earthworms, who feed in the leaf litter, for elm leaves are among
their favorite foods. In feeding on the leaves the worms also
swallow the insecticide, accumulating and concentrating it in
their bodies. Dr. Barker found deposits of DDT throughout the
digestive tracts of the worms, their blood vessels, nerves, and body
wall. Undoubtedly some of the earthworms themselves succumb,
but others survive to become biological magnifiers of the
poison. In the spring the robins return to provide another link in
the cycle. As few as  large earthworms can transfer a lethal dose
of DDT to a robin. And  worms form a small part of a days
rations to a bird that eats  to  earthworms in as many
minutes.
Not all robins receive a lethal dose, but another consequence
may lead to the extinction of their kind as surely as fatal
poisoning. e shadow of sterility lies over all the bird studies and
indeed lengthens to include all living things within its potential
range. ere are now only two or three dozen robins to be found
each spring on the entire -acre campus of Michigan State
University, compared with a conservatively estimated  adults
in this area before spraying. In  every robin nest under
observation by Mehner produced young. Toward the end of June,
, when at least  young birds (the normal replacement of
the adult population) would have been foraging over the campus
in the years before spraying began, Mehner could find only one
young robin. A year later Dr. Wallace was to report: At no time
during the spring or summer [of ] did I see a fledgling robin
anywhere on the main campus, and so far I have failed to find
anyone else who has seen one there.
Part of this failure to produce young is due, of course, to the
fact that one or more of a pair of robins dies before the nesting
cycle is completed. But Wallace has significant records which
point to something more sinisterthe actual destruction of the
birds capacity to reproduce. He has, for example, records of
robins and other birds building nests but laying no eggs, and
others laying eggs and incubating them but not hatching them.
We have one record of a robin that sat on its eggs faithfully for
days and they did not hatch. e normal incubation period is
days  Our analyses are showing high concentrations of DDT in
the testes and ovaries of breeding birds, he told a congressional
committee in . Ten males had amounts ranging from  to
parts per million in the testes, and two females had  and
parts per million respectively in the egg follicles in their
ovaries.
Soon studies in other areas began to develop findings equally
dismal. Professor Joseph Hickey and his students at the University
of Wisconsin, after careful comparative studies of sprayed and
unsprayed areas, reported the robin mortality to be at least  to
per cent. e Cranbrook Institute of Science at Bloomfield
Hills, Michigan, in an effort to assess the extent of bird loss caused by the spraying of the elms, asked in  that all birds thought
to be victims of DDT poisoning be turned in to the institute for
examination. e request had a response beyond all expectations.
Within a few weeks the deep-freeze facilities of the institute were
taxed to capacity, so that other specimens had to be refused. By
a thousand poisoned birds from this single community had
been turned in or reported. Although the robin was the chief
victim (one woman calling the institute reported  robins lying
dead on her lawn as she spoke),  different species were included
among the specimens examined at the institute.
e robins, then, are only one part of the chain of devastation
linked to the spraying of the elms, even as the elm program is only
one of the multitudinous spray programs that cover our land with
poisons. Heavy mortality has occurred among about  species of
birds, including those most familiar to suburbanites and amateur
naturalists. e populations of nesting birds in general have
declined as much as  per cent in some of the sprayed towns. As
we shall see, all the various types of birds are affectedground
feeders, treetop feeders, bark feeders, predators.
It is only reasonable to suppose that all birds and mammals
heavily dependent on earthworms or other soil organisms for
food are threatened by the robins fate. Some  species of birds
include earthworms in their diet. Among them is the woodcock,
a species that winters in southern areas recently heavily sprayed
with heptachlor. Two significant discoveries have now been made
about the woodcock. Production of young birds on the New
Brunswick breeding grounds is definitely reduced, and adult birds
that have been analyzed contain large residues of DDT and
heptachlor.
Already there are disturbing records of heavy mortality
among more than  other species of ground-feeding birds whose
foodworms, ants, grubs, or other soil organismshas been
poisoned. ese include three of the thrushes whose songs are
among the most exquisite of bird voices, the olive-backed, the
wood, and the hermit. And the sparrows that flit through the
shrubby understory of the woodlands and forage with rustling
sounds amid the fallen leavesthe song sparrow and the white-
throatthese, too, have been found among the victims of the elm
sprays.
Mammals, also, may easily be involved in the cycle, directly or
indirectly. Earthworms are important among the various foods of
the raccoon, and are eaten in the spring and fall by opossums.
Such subterranean tunnelers as shrews and moles capture them
in some numbers, and then perhaps pass on the poison to
predators such as screech owls and barn owls. Several dying
screech owls were picked up in Wisconsin following heavy rains
in spring, perhaps poisoned by feeding on earthworms. Hawks
and owls have been found in convulsionsgreat horned owls,
screech owls, red-shouldered hawks, sparrow hawks, marsh
hawks. ese may be cases of secondary poisoning, caused by
eating birds or mice that have accumulated insecticides in their
livers or other organs.
Nor is it only the creatures that forage on the ground or those
who prey on them that are endangered by the foliar spray ing of
the elms. All of the treetop feeders, the birds that glean their
insect food from the leaves, have disappeared from heavily
sprayed areas, among them those woodland sprites the kinglets,
both ruby-crowned and golden-crowned, the tiny gnatcatchers,
and many of the warblers, whose migrating hordes flow through
the trees in spring in a multicolored tide of life. In , a late
spring delayed spraying so that it coincided with the arrival of an exceptionally heavy wave of warbler migration. Nearly all species
of warblers present in the area were represented in the heavy kill
that followed. In Whitefish Bay, Wisconsin, at least a thousand
myrtle warblers could be seen in migration during former years;
in , after the spraying of the elms, observers could find only
two. So, with additions from other communities, the list grows,
and the warblers killed by the spray include those that most
charm and fascinate all who are aware of them: the black-and-
white, the yellow, the magnolia, and the Cape May; the ovenbird,
whose call throbs in the Maytime woods; the Blackburnian,
whose wings are touched with flame; the chestnut-sided, the
Canadian, and the black-throated green. ese treetop feeders are
affected either directly by eating poisoned insects or indirectly by
a shortage of food.
e loss of food has also struck hard at the swallows that
cruise the skies, straining out the aerial insects as herring strain
the plankton of the sea. A Wisconsin naturalist reported:
Swallows have been hard hit. Everyone complains of how few
they have compared to four or five years ago. Our sky overhead
was full of them only four years ago. Now we seldom see any
is could be both lack of insects because of spray, or poisoned
insects.
Of other birds this same observer wrote: Another striking
loss is the phoebe. Flycatchers are scarce everywhere but the early
hardy common phoebe is no more. Ive seen one this spring and
only one last spring. Other birders in Wisconsin make the same
complaint. I have had five or six pair of cardinals in the past, none
now. Wrens, robins, catbirds and screech owls have nested each
year in our garden. ere are none now. Summer mornings are
without bird song. Only pest birds, pigeons, starlings and English sparrows remain. It is tragic and I cant bear it.
e dormant sprays applied to the elms in the fall, sending
the poison into every little crevice in the bark, are probably
responsible for the severe reduction observed in the number of
chickadees, nuthatches, titmice, woodpeckers, and brown
creepers. During the winter of -, Dr. Wallace saw no
chickadees or nuthatches at his home feeding station for the first
time in many years. ree nuthatches he found later provided a
sorry little step-by-step lesson in cause and effect: one was feeding
on an elm, another was found dying of typical DDT symptoms,
the third was dead. e dying nuthatch was later found to have
pans per million of DDT in its tissues.
e feeding habits of all these birds not only make them
especially vulnerable to insect sprays but also make their loss a
deplorable one for economic as well as less tangible reasons. e
summer food of the white-breasted nuthatch and the brown
creeper, for example, includes the eggs, larvae, and adults of a very
large number of insects injurious to trees. About three quarters of
the food of the chickadee is animal, including all stages of the life
cycle of many insects. e chickadees method of feeding is
described in Bents monumental Life Histories of North American
birds: As the flock moves along each bird examines minutely
bark, twigs, and branches, searching for tiny bits of food (spiders
eggs, cocoons, or other dormant insect life).
Various scientific studies have established the critical role of
birds in insect control in various situations. us, woodpeckers
are the primary control of the Engelmann spruce beetle, reducing
its populations from  to  per cent and are important in the
control of the codling moth in apple orchards. Chickadees and
other winter-resident birds can protect orchards against the
cankerworm.
But what happens in nature is not allowed to happen in the
modern, chemical-drenched world, where spraying destroys not
only the insects but their principal enemy, the birds. When later
there is a resurgence of the insect population, as almost always
happens, the birds are not there to keep their numbers in check.
As the Curator of Birds at the Milwaukee Public Museum, Owen
J. Gromme, wrote to the Milwaukee Journal: e greatest enemy
of insect life is other predatory insects, birds, and some small
mammals, but DDT kills indiscriminately, including natures own
safeguards or policemen  In the name of progress are we to
become victims of our own diabolical means of insect control to
provide temporary comfort, only to lose out to destroying insects
later on? By what means will we control new pests, which will
attack remaining tree species after the elms are gone, when
natures safeguards (the birds) have been wiped out by poison?
Mr. Gromme reported that calls and letters about dead and
dying birds had been increasing steadily during the years since
spraying began in Wisconsin. Questioning always revealed that
spraying or fogging had been done in the area where the birds
were dying.
Mr. Grommes experience has been shared by ornithologists
and conservationists at most of the research centers of the
Midwest such as the Cranbrook Institute in Michigan, the Illinois
Natural History Survey, and the University of Wisconsin. A
glance at the Letters-from-Readers column of newspapers almost
anywhere that spraying is being done makes clear the fact that
citizens are not only becoming aroused and indignant but that
often they show a keener understanding of the dangers and
inconsistencies of spraying than do the officials who order it done.
I am dreading the days to come soon now when many beautiful
birds will be dying in our back yard, wrote a Mil waukee woman.
is is a pitiful, heartbreaking experience  It is, moreover,
frustrating and exasperating, for it evidently does not serve the
purpose this slaughter was intended to serve  Taking a long
look, can you save trees without also saving birds? Do they not, in
the economy of nature, save each other? Isnt it possible to help
the balance of nature without destroying it?
e idea that the elms, majestic shade trees though they are,
are not sacred cows and do not justify an open end campaign
of destruction against all other forms of life is expressed in other
letters. I have always loved our elm trees which seemed like
trademarks on our landscape, wrote another Wisconsin woman.
But there are many kinds of trees  We must save our birds, too.
Can anyone imagine anything so cheerless and dreary as a
springtime without a robins song?
To the public the choice may easily appear to be one of stark
black-or-white simplicity: Shall we have birds or shall we have
elms? But it is not as simple as that, and by one of the ironies that
abound throughout the field of chemical control we may very well
end by having neither if we continue on our present, well-traveled
road. Spraying is killing the birds but it is not saving the elms. e
illusion that salvation of the elms lies at the end of a spray nozzle
is a dangerous will-o-the-wisp that is leading one community
after another into a morass of heavy expenditures, without
producing lasting results. Greenwich, Connecticut, sprayed
regularly for ten years. en a drought year brought conditions
especially favorable to the beetle and the mortality of elms went
up  per cent. In Urbana, Illinois, where the University of
Illinois is located, Dutch elm disease first appeared in .
Spraying was undertaken in . By , in spite of six years
spraying, the university campus had lost  per cent of its elms,
half of them victims of Dutch elm disease.
In Toledo, Ohio, a similar experience caused the Superintend
ent of Forestry, Joseph A. Sweeney, to take a realistic look at the
results of spraying. Spraying was begun there in  and
continued through . Meanwhile, however, Mr. Sweeney had
noticed that a city-wide infestation of the cottony maple scale was
worse after the spraying recommended by the books and the
authorities than it had been before. He decided to review the
results of spraying for Dutch elm disease for himself. His findings
shocked him. In the city of Toledo, he found, the only areas
under any control were the areas where we used some
promptness in removing the diseased or brood trees. Where we
depended on spraying the disease was out of control. In the
country where nothing has been done the disease has not spread
as fast as it has in the city. is indicates that spraying destroys
any natural enemies.
We are abandoning spraying for the Dutch elm disease. is
has brought me into conflict with the people who back any
recommendations by the United States Department of
Agriculture but I have the facts and will stick with them.
It is difficult to understand why these midwestern towns, to
which the elm disease spread only rather recently, have so
unquestioningly embarked on ambitious and expensive spraying
programs, apparently without waiting to inquire into the
experience of other areas that have had longer acquaintance with
the problem. New York State, for example, has certainly had the
longest history of continuous experience with Dutch elm disease,
for it was via the Port of New York that diseased elm wood is
thought to have entered the United States about . And New
York State today has a most impressive record of containing and
suppressing the disease. Yet it has not relied upon spraying. In
fact, its agricultural extension service does not recommend
spraying as a community method of control.
How, then, has New York achieved its fine record? From the
early years of the battle for the elms to the present time, it has
relied upon rigorous sanitation, or the prompt removal and
destruction of all diseased or infected wood. In the beginning
some of the results were disappointing, but this was because it
was not at first understood that not only diseased trees but all elm
wood in which the beetles might breed must be destroyed.
Infected elm wood, after being cut and stored for firewood, will
release a crop of fungus-carrying beetles unless burned before
spring. It is the adult beetles, emerging from hibernation to feed
in late April and May, that transmit Dutch elm disease. New York
entomologists have learned by experience what kinds of beetle-
breeding material have real importance in the spread of the
disease. By concentrating on this dangerous material, it has been
possible not only to get good results, but to keep the cost of the
sanitation program within reasonable limits. By  the
incidence of Dutch elm disease in New York City had been
reduced to / of  per cent of the citys , elms. A sanitation
program was launched in Westchester County in . During
the next  years the average annual loss of elms was only / of
per cent a year. Buffalo, with , elms, has an excellent
record of containing the disease by sanitation, with recent annual
losses amounting to only / of  per cent. In other words, at this
rate of loss it would take about  years to eliminate Buffalos
elms.
What has happened in Syracuse is especially impressive.
ere no effective program was in operation before .
Between  and  Syracuse lost nearly  elms. en,
under the direction of Howard C. Miller of the New York State
University College of Forestry, an intensive drive was made to
remove all diseased elm trees and all possible sources of beetle-
breeding elm wood. e rate of loss is now well below  per cent
a year.
e economy of the sanitation method is stressed by New
York experts in Dutch elm disease control. In most cases the
actual expense is small compared with the probable saving, says
J. G. Matthysse of the New York State College of Agri culture. If
it is a case of a dead or broken limb, the limb would have to be
removed eventually, as a precaution against possible property
damage or personal injury. If it is a fuel-wood pile, the wood can
be used before spring, the bark can be peeled from the wood, or
the wood can be stored in a dry place. In the case of dying or dead
elm trees, the expense of prompt removal to prevent Dutch elm
disease spread is usually no greater than would be necessary later,
for most dead trees in urban regions must be removed
eventually.
e situation with regard to Dutch elm disease is therefore
not entirely hopeless provided informed and intelligent measures
are taken. While it cannot be eradicated by any means now
known, once it has become established in a community, it can be
suppressed and contained within reasonable bounds by
sanitation, and without the use of methods that are not only futile
but involve tragic destruction of bird life. Other possibilities lie
within the field of forest genetics, where experiments offer hope
of developing a hybrid elm resistant to Dutch elm disease. e
European elm is highly resistant, and many of them have been
planted in Washington, D.C. Even during a period when a high
percentage of the citys elms were affected, no cases of Dutch elm
disease were found among these trees.
Replanting through an immediate tree nursery and forestry
program is being urged in communities that are losing large
numbers of elms. is is important, and although such programs
might well include the resistant European elms, they should aim
at a variety of species so that no future epidemic could deprive a
community of its trees. e key to a healthy plant or animal
community lies in what the British ecologist Charles Elton calls
the conservation of variety. What is happening now is in large
part a result of the biological unsophistication of past generations.
Even a generation ago no one knew that to fill large areas with a
single species of tree was to invite disaster. And so whole towns
lined their streets and dotted their parks with elms, and today the
elms die and so do the birds.
Like the robin, another American bird seems to be on the
verge of extinction. is is the national symbol, the eagle. Its
populations have dwindled alarmingly within the past decade.
e facts suggest that something is at work in the eagles
environment which has virtually destroyed its ability to
reproduce. What this may be is not yet definitely known, but there
is some evidence that insecticides are responsible.
e most intensively studied eagles in North America have
been those nesting along a stretch of coast from Tampa to Fort
Myers on the western coast of Florida. ere a retired banker
from Winnipeg, Charles Broley, achieved ornithological fame by
banding more than  young bald eagles during the years -
. (Only  eagles had been banded in all the earlier history of
birdbanding.) Mr. Broley banded eagles as young birds during the
winter months before they had left their nests. Later recoveries of
banded birds showed that these Florida-born eagles range
northward along the coast into Canada as far as Prince Edward
Island, although they had previously been considered
nonmigratory. In the fall they return to the South, their migration being observed at such famous vantage points as Hawk Mountain
in eastern Pennsylvania.
During the early years of his banding, Mr. Broley used to find
active nests a year on the stretch of coast he had chosen for
his work. e number of young banded each year was about .
In  the production of young birds began to decline. Some
nests contained no eggs; others contained eggs that failed to
hatch. Between  and , about  per cent of the nests
failed to produce young. In the last year of this period only
nests were occupied. Seven of them produced young ( eaglets);
contained eggs that failed to hatch;  were used merely as
feeding stations by adult eagles and contained no eggs. In
Mr. Broley ranged over  miles of coast before finding and
banding one eaglet. Adult eagles, which had been seen at  nests
in , were so scarce that he observed them at only  nests.
Although Mr. Broleys death in  terminated this valuable
series of uninterrupted observations, reports by the Florida
Audubon Society, as well as from New Jersey and Pennsylvania,
confirm the trend that may well make it necessary for us to find a
new national emblem. e reports of Maurice Broun, curator of
the Hawk Mountain Sanctuary, are especially significant. Hawk
Mountain is a picturesque mountaintop in southeastern
Pennsylvania, where the easternmost ridges of the Appalachians
form a last barrier to the westerly winds before dropping away
toward the coastal plain. Winds striking the mountains are
deflected upward so that on many autumn days there is a
continuous updraft on which the broad-winged hawks and eagles
ride without effort, covering many miles of their southward
migration in a day. At Hawk Mountain the ridges converge and
so do the aerial highways. e result is that from a widespread
territory to the north birds pass through this traffic bottleneck.
In his more than a score of years as custodian of the sanctuary
there, Maurice Broun has observed and actually tabulated more
hawks and eagles than any other American. e peak of the bald
eagle migration comes in late August and early September. ese
are assumed to be Florida birds, returning to home territory after
a summer in the North. (Later in the fall and early winter a few
larger eagles drift through. ese are thought to belong to a
northern race, bound for an unknown wintering ground.) During
the first years after the sanctuary was established, from  to
,  per cent of the eagles observed were yearlings, easily
identified by their uniformly dark plumage. But in recent years
these immature birds have become a rarity. Between  and
, they made up only  per cent of the total count, and in one
year () there was only one young eagle for every  adults.
Observations at Hawk Mountain are in line with findings
elsewhere. One such report comes from Elton Fawks, an official
of the Natural Resources Council of Illinois. Eaglesprobably
northern nesterswinter along the Mississippi and Illinois
Rivers. In  Mr. Fawks reported that a recent count of
eagles had included only one immature bird. Similar indications
of the dying out of the race come from the worlds only sanctuary
for eagles alone, Mount Johnson Island in the Susquehanna River.
e island, although only  miles above Conowingo Dam and
about half a mile out from the Lancaster County shore, retains its
primitive wildness. Since  its single eagle nest has been under
observation by Professor Herbert H. Beck, an ornithologist of
Lancaster and custodian of the sanctuary. Between  and
use of the nest was regular and uniformly successful. Since ,
although the adults have occupied the nest and there is evidence
of egg laying, no young eagles have been produced.
On Mount Johnson Island as well as in Florida, then, the same
situation prevailsthere is some occupancy of nests by adults,
some production of eggs, but few or no young birds. In seeking an
explanation, only one appears to fit all the facts. is is that the
reproductive capacity of the birds has been so lowered by some
environmental agent that there are now almost no annual
additions of young to maintain the race.
Exactly this sort of situation has been produced artificially in
other birds by various experimenters, notably Dr. James DeWitt
of the United States Fish and Wildlife Service. Dr. DeWitts now
classic experiments on the effect of a series of insecticides on quail
and pheasants have established the fact that exposure to DDT or
related chemicals, even when doing no observable harm to the
parent birds, may seriously affect reproduction. e way the effect
is exerted may vary, but the end result is always the same. For
example, quail into whose diet DDT was introduced throughout
the breeding season survived and even produced normal numbers
of fertile eggs. But few of the eggs hatched. Many embryos
appeared to develop normally during the early stages of
incubation, but died during the hatching period, Dr. DeWitt
said. Of those that did hatch, more than half died within  days.
In other tests in which both pheasants and quail were the subjects,
the adults produced no eggs whatever if they had been fed
insecticide-contaminated diets throughout the year. And at the
University of California, Dr. Robert Rudd and Dr. Richard Genelly
reported similar findings. When pheasants received dieldrin in
their diets, egg production was markedly lowered and chick
survival was poor. According to these authors, the delayed but
lethal effect on the young birds follows from storage of dieldrin in
the yolk of the egg, from which it is gradually assimilated during incubation and after hatching.
is suggestion is strongly supported by recent studies by Dr.
Wallace and a graduate student, Richard F. Bernard, who found
high concentrations of DDT in robins on the Michigan State
University campus. ey found the poison in all of the testes of
male robins examined, in developing egg follicles, in the ovaries
of females, in completed but unlaid eggs, in the oviducts, in
unhatched eggs from deserted nests, in embryos within the eggs,
and in a newly hatched, dead nestling.
ese important studies establish the fact that the insecticidal
poison affects a generation once removed from initial contact
with it. Storage of poison in the egg, in the yolk material that
nourishes the developing embryo, is a virtual death warrant and
explains why so many of DeWitts birds died in the egg or a few
days after hatching.
Laboratory application of these studies to eagles presents
difficulties that are nearly insuperable, but field studies are now
under way in Florida, New Jersey, and elsewhere in the hope of
acquiring definite evidence as to what has caused the apparent
sterility of much of the eagle population. Meanwhile, the available
circumstantial evidence points to insecticides. In localities where
fish are abundant they make up a large part of the eagles diet
(about  per cent in Alaska; about  per cent in the Chesapeake
Bay area). Almost unquestionably the eagles so long studied by
Mr. Broley were predominantly fish eaters. Since  this
particular coastal area has been subjected to repeated sprayings
with DDT dissolved in fuel oil. e principal target of the aerial
spraying was the salt-marsh mosquito, which inhabits the
marshes and coastal areas that are typical foraging areas for the
eagles. Fishes and crabs were killed in enormous numbers.
Laboratory analyses of their tissues revealed high concentrations
of DDTas much as  parts per million. Like the grebes of Clear
Lake, which accumulated heavy concentrations of insecticide
residues from eating the fish of the lake, the eagles have almost
certainly been storing up the DDT in the tissues of their bodies.
And like the grebes, the pheasants, the quail, and the robins, they
are less and less able to produce young and to preserve the
continuity of their race.
From all over the world come echoes of the peril that faces
birds in our modern world. e reports differ in detail, but always
repeat the theme of death to wildlife in the wake of pesticides.
Such are the stories of hundreds of small birds and partridges
dying in France after vine stumps were treated with an arsenic-
containing herbicide, or of partridge shoots in Belgium, once
famous for the numbers of their birds, denuded of partridges after
the spraying of nearby farmlands.
In England the major problem seems to be a specialized one,
linked with the growing practice of treating seed with insecticides
before sowing. Seed treatment is not a wholly new thing, but in
earlier years the chemicals principally used were fungi cides. No
effects on birds seem to have been noticed. en about  there
was a change to dual-purpose treatment; in addition to a
fungicide, dieldrin, aldrin, or heptachlor was added to combat soil
insects. ereupon the situation changed for the worse.
In the spring of  a deluge of reports of dead birds reached
British wildlife authorities, including the British Trust for
Ornithology, the Royal Society for the Protection of Birds, and the
Game Birds Association. e place is like a battlefield, a
landowner in Norfolk wrote. My keeper has found innumerable
corpses, including masses of small birdsChaffinches,
Greenfinches, Linnets, Hedge Sparrows, also House Sparrows
the destruction of wild life is quite pitiful. A gamekeeper wrote:
My Partridges have been wiped out with the dressed corn, also
some Pheasants and all other birds, hundreds of birds have been
killed  As a lifelong gamekeeper it has been a distressing
experience for me. It is bad to see pairs of Partridges that have
died together.
In a joint report, the British Trust for Ornithology and the
Royal Society for the Protection of Birds described some  kills
of birdsa far from complete listing of the destruction that took
place in the spring of . Of these ,  were caused by seed
dressings,  by toxic sprays.
A new wave of poisoning set in the following year. e death
of  birds on a single estate in Norfolk was reported to the
House of Lords, and  pheasants died on a farm in North Essex.
It soon became evident that more counties were involved than in
( compared with ). Lincolnshire, heavily agricultural,
seemed to have suffered most, with reports of , birds dead.
But destruction involved all of agricultural England, from Angus
in the north to Cornwall in the south, from Anglesey in the west
to Norfolk in the east.
In the spring of  concern reached such a peak that a
special committee of the House of Commons made an investi
gation of the matter, taking testimony from farmers, landowners,
and representatives of the Ministry of Agriculture and of various
governmental and nongovernmental agencies concerned with
wildlife.
Pigeons are suddenly dropping out of the sky dead, said one
witness. You can drive a hundred or two hundred miles outside
London and not see a single kestrel, reported another. ere has
been no parallel in the present century, or at any time so far as I
am aware, [this is] the biggest risk to wildlife and game that ever
occurred in the country, officials of the Nature Conservancy
testified.
Facilities for chemical analysis of the victims were most
inadequate to the task, with only two chemists in the country able
to make the tests (one the government chemist, the other in the
employ of the Royal Society for the Protection of Birds).
Witnesses described huge bonfires on which the bodies of the
birds were burned. But efforts were made to have carcasses
collected for examination, and of the birds analyzed, all but one
contained pesticide residues. e single exception was a snipe,
which is not a seed-eating bird.
Along with the birds, foxes also may have been affected,
probably indirectly by eating poisoned mice or birds. England,
plagued by rabbits, sorely needs the fox as a predator. But
between November  and April  at least  foxes died.
Deaths were heaviest in the same counties from which sparrow
hawks, kestrels, and other birds of prey virtually disappeared,
suggesting that the poison was spreading through the food chain,
reaching out from the seed eaters to the furred and feathered
carnivores. e actions of the moribund foxes were those of
animals poisoned by chlorinated hydrocarbon insecticides. ey
were seen wandering in circles, dazed and half blind, before dying
in convulsions.
e hearings convinced the committee that the threat to
wildlife was most alarming; it accordingly recommended to the
House of Commons that the Minister of Agriculture and the
Secretary of State for Scotland should secure the immediate
prohibition for the use as seed dressings of compounds
containing dieldrin, aldrin, or heptachlor, or chemicals of
comparable toxicity. e committee also recommended more
adequate controls to ensure that chemicals were adequately
tested under field as well as laboratory conditions before being
put on the market. is, it is worth emphasizing, is one of the
great blank spots in pesticide research everywhere.
Manufacturers tests on the common laboratory animalsrats,
dogs, guinea pigsinclude no wild species, no birds as a rule, no
fishes, and are conducted under controlled and artificial
conditions. eir application to wildlife in the field is anything but
precise.
England is by no means alone in its problem of protecting
birds from treated seeds. Here in the United States the problem
has been most troublesome in the rice-growing areas of California
and the South. For a number of years California rice growers have
been treating seed with DDT as protection against tadpole shrimp
and scavenger beetles which sometimes damage seedling rice.
California sportsmen have enjoyed excellent hunting because of
the concentrations of waterfowl and pheasants in the rice fields.
But for the past decade persistent reports of bird losses, especially
among pheasants, ducks, and blackbirds, have come from the
rice-growing counties. Pheasant sickness became a well-known
phenomenon: birds seek water, become paralyzed, and are found
on the ditch banks and rice checks quivering, according to one
observer. e sickness comes in the spring, at the time the rice
fields are seeded. e concentration of DDT used is many times
the amount that will kill an adult pheasant.
e passage of a few years and the development of even more
poisonous insecticides served to increase the hazard from treated
seed. Aldrin, which is  times as toxic as DDT to pheasants, is
now widely used as a seed coating. In the rice fields of eastern
Texas, this practice has seriously reduced the populations of the
fulvous tree duck, a tawny-colored, gooselike duck of the Gulf
Coast. Indeed, there is some reason to think that the rice growers,
having found a way to reduce the populations of blackbirds, are
using the insecticide for a dual purpose, with disastrous effects on
several bird species of the rice fields.
As the habit of killing growsthe resort to eradicating any
creature that may annoy or inconvenience usbirds are more
and more finding themselves a direct target of poisons rather than
an incidental one. ere is a growing trend toward aerial
applications of such deadly poisons as parathion to control
concentrations of birds distasteful to farmers. e Fish and
Wildlife Service has found it necessary to express serious concern
over this trend, pointing out that parathion treated areas
constitute a potential hazard to humans, domestic animals, and
wildlife. In southern Indiana, for example, a group of farmers
went together in the summer of  to engage a spray plane to
treat an area of river bottomland with parathion. e area was a
favored roosting site for thousands of blackbirds that were
feeding in nearby cornfields. e problem could have been solved
easily by a slight change in agricultural practicea shift to a
variety of corn with deep-set ears not accessible to the birdsbut
the farmers had been persuaded of the merits of killing by poison,
and so they sent in the planes on their mission of death.
e results probably gratified the farmers, for the casualty list
included some , red-winged blackbirds and starlings. What
other wildlife deaths may have gone unnoticed and unrecorded is
not known. Parathion is not a specific for blackbirds: it is a
universal killer. But such rabbits or raccoons or opossums as may
have roamed those bottomlands and perhaps never visited the
farmers cornfields were doomed by a judge and jury who neither
knew of their existence nor cared.
And what of human beings? In California orchards sprayed
with this same parathion, workers handling foliage that had been
treated a month earlier collapsed and went into shock, and escaped death only through skilled medical attention. Does
Indiana still raise any boys who roam through woods or fields and
might even explore the margins of a river? If so, who guarded the
poisoned area to keep out any who might wander in, in misguided
search for unspoiled nature? Who kept vigilant watch to tell the
innocent stroller that the fields he was about to enter were
deadlyall their vegetation coated with a lethal film? Yet at so
fearful a risk the farmers, with none to hinder them, waged their
needless war on blackbirds.
In each of these situations, one turns away to ponder the
question: Who has made the decision that sets in motion these
chains of poisonings, this ever-widening wave of death that
spreads out, like ripples when a pebble is dropped into a still
pond? Who has placed in one pan of the scales the leaves that
might have been eaten by the beetles and in the other the pitiful
heaps of many-hued feathers, the lifeless remains of the birds that
fell before the unselective bludgeon of insecticidal poisons? Who
has decidedwho has the right to decidefor the countless
legions of people who were not consulted that the supreme value
is a world without insects, even though it be also a sterile world
ungraced by the curving wing of a bird in flight? e decision is
that of the authoritarian temporarily entrusted with power; he has
made it during a moment of inattention by millions to whom
beauty and the ordered world of nature still have a meaning that
is deep and imperative.
