FROM THE GREEN DEPTHS of the offshore Atlantic many
paths lead back to the coast. ey are paths followed by fish;
although unseen and intangible, they are linked with the outflow
of waters from the coastal rivers. For thousands upon thousands
of years the salmon have known and followed these threads of
fresh water that lead them back to the rivers, each returning to
the tributary in which it spent the first months or years of life. So,
in the summer and fall of , the salmon of the river called
Miramichi on the coast of New Brunswick moved in from their
feeding grounds in the far Atlantic and ascended their native
river. In the upper reaches of the Miramichi, in streams that
gather together a network of shadowed brooks, the salmon
deposited their eggs that autumn in beds of gravel over which the
stream water flowed swift and cold. Such places, the watersheds
of the great coniferous forests of spruce and balsam, of hemlock
and pine, provide the kind of spawning grounds that salmon must
have in order to survive.
ese events repeated a pattern that was age-old, a pattern
that had made the Miramichi one of the finest salmon streams in
North America. But that year the pattern was to be broken.
During the fall and winter the salmon eggs, large and thick-
shelled, lay in shallow gravel-filled troughs, or redds, which the
mother fish had dug in the stream bottom. In the cold of winter
they developed slowly, as was their way, and only when spring at
last brought thawing and release to the forest streams did the
young hatch. At first they hid among the pebbles of the stream
bedtiny fish about half an inch long. ey took no food, living
on the large yolk sac. Not until it was absorbed would they begin
to search the stream for small insects.
With the newly hatched salmon in the Miramichi that spring
of  were young of previous hatchings, salmon a year or two
old, young fish in brilliant coats marked with bars and bright red
spots. ese young fed voraciously, seeking out the strange and
varied insect life of the stream.
As the summer approached, all this was changed. at year
the watershed of the Northwest Miramichi was included in a vast
spraying program which the Canadian Government had
embarked upon the previous yeara program designed to save
the forests from the spruce budworm. e budworm is a native
insect that attacks several kinds of evergreens. In eastern Canada
it seems to become extraordinarily abundant about every
years. e early s had seen such an upsurge in the budworm
populations. To combat it, spraying with DDT was begun, first in
a small way, then at a suddenly accelerated rate in . Millions
of acres of forests were sprayed instead of thou sands as before, in
an effort to save the balsams, which are the mainstay of the pulp
and paper industry.
So in , in the month of June, the planes visited the forests
of the Northwest Miramichi and white clouds of settling mist
marked the crisscross pattern of their flight. e sprayone-half
pound of DDT to the acre in a solution of oilfiltered down
through the balsam forests and some of it finally reached the
ground and the flowing streams. e pilots, their thoughts only
on their assigned task, made no effort to avoid the streams or to
shut off the spray nozzles while flying over them; but because
spray drifts so far in even the slightest stirrings of air, perhaps the
result would have been little different if they had.
Soon after the spraying had ended there were unmistakable
signs that all was not well. Within two days dead and dying fish,
including many young salmon, were found along the banks of the
stream. Brook trout also appeared among the dead fish, and along
the roads and in the woods birds were dying. All the life of the
stream was stilled. Before the spraying there had been a rich
assortment of the water life that forms the food of salmon and
troutcaddis fly larvae, living in loosely fitting protective cases of
leaves, stems or gravel cemented together with saliva, stonefly
nymphs clinging to rocks in the swirling currents, and the
wormlike larvae of blackflies edging the stones under riffles or
where the stream spills over steeply slanting rocks. But now the
stream insects were dead, killed by the DDT, and there was
nothing for a young salmon to eat.
Amid such a picture of death and destruction, the young
salmon themselves could hardly have been expected to escape,
and they did not. By August not one of the young salmon that had
emerged from the gravel beds that spring remained. A whole
years spawning had come to nothing. e older young, those
hatched a year or more earlier, fared only slightly better. For every
six young of the  hatch that had foraged in the stream as the
planes approached, only one remained. Young salmon of the
hatch, almost ready to go to sea, lost a third of their numbers.
All these facts are known because the Fisheries Research
Board of Canada had been conducting a salmon study on the
Northwest Miramichi since . Each year it had made a census
of the fish living in this stream. e records of the biologists
covered the number of adult salmon ascending to spawn, the
number of young of each age group present in the stream, and the
normal population not only of salmon but of other species of fish
inhabiting the stream. With this complete record of prespraying
conditions, it was possible to measure the damage done by the
spraying with an accuracy that has seldom been matched
elsewhere.
e survey showed more than the loss of young fish; it
revealed a serious change in the streams themselves. Repeated
sprayings have now completely altered the stream environment,
and the aquatic insects that are the food of salmon and trout have
been killed. A great deal of time is required, even after a single
spraying, for most of these insects to build up sufficient numbers
to support a normal salmon populationtime measured in years
rather than months.
e smaller species, such as midges and blackflies, become re-
established rather quickly. ese are suitable food for the smallest
salmon, the fry only a few months old. But there is no such rapid
recovery of the larger aquatic insects, on which salmon in their
second and third years depend. ese are the larval stages of
caddis flies, stoneflies, and mayflies. Even in the second year after
DDT enters a stream, a foraging salmon parr would have trouble
finding anything more than an occasional small stonefly. ere
would be no large stoneflies, no mayflies, no caddis flies. In an
effort to supply this natural food, the Canadians have attempted
to transplant caddis fly larvae and other insects to the barren
reaches of the Miramichi. But of course such transplants would
be wiped out by any repeated spraying.
e budworm populations, instead of dwindling as expected,
have proved refractory, and from  to  spraying was
repeated in various parts of New Brunswick and Quebec, some
places being sprayed as many as three times. By , nearly
million acres had been sprayed. Although spraying was then
tentatively suspended, a sudden resurgence of budworms led to
its resumption in  and . Indeed there is no evidence
anywhere that chemical spraying for budworm control is more
than a stopgap measure (aimed at saving the trees from death
through defoliation over several successive years), and so its
unfortunate side effects will continue to be felt as spraying is
continued. In an effort to minimize the destruction of fish, the
Canadian forestry officials have reduced the concentration of
DDT from the / pound previously used to / pound to the
acre, on the recommendation of the Fisheries Research Board. (In
the United States the standard and highly lethal pound-to-the-
acre still prevails.) Now, after several years in which to observe
the effects of spraying, the Canadians find a mixed situation, but
one that affords very little comfort to devotees of salmon fishing,
provided spraying is continued.
A very unusual combination of circumstances has so far saved
the runs of the Northwest Miramichi from the destruction that
was anticipateda constellation of happenings that might not
occur again in a century. It is important to understand what has
happened there, and the reasons for it.
In , as we have seen, the watershed of this branch of the
Miramichi was heavily sprayed. ereafter, except for a narrow
band sprayed in , the whole upper watershed of this branch
was excluded from the spraying program. In the fall of  a
tropical storm played its part in the fortunes of the Miramichi
salmon. Hurricane Edna, a violent storm to the very end of its
northward path, brought torrential rains to the New England and
Canadian coasts. e resulting freshets carried streams of fresh
water far out to sea and drew in unusual numbers of salmon. As a
result, the gravel beds of the streams which the salmon seek out
for spawning received an unusual abundance of eggs. e young
salmon hatching in the Northwest Miramichi in the spring of
found circumstances practically ideal for their survival.
While the DDT had killed off all stream insects the year before,
the smallest of the insectsthe midges and blackflieshad
returned in numbers. ese are the normal food of baby salmon.
e salmon fry of that year not only found abundant food but they
had few competitors for it. is was because of the grim fact that
the older young salmon had been killed off by the spraying in
. Accordingly, the fry of  grew very fast and survived in
exceptional numbers. ey completed their stream growth
rapidly and went to sea early. Many of them returned in  to
give large runs of grilse to the native stream.
If the runs in the Northwest Miramichi are still in relatively
good condition this is because spraying was done in one year only.
e results of repeated spraying are clearly seen in other streams
of the watershed, where alarming declines in the salmon
populations are occurring.
In all sprayed streams, young salmon of every size are scarce.
e youngest are often practically wiped out, the biologists
report. In the main Southwest Miramichi, which was sprayed in
and , the  catch was the lowest in a decade.
Fishermen remarked on the extreme scarcity of grilsethe
youngest group of returning fish. At the sampling trap in the
estuary of the Miramichi the count of grilse was only a fourth as
large in  as the year before. In  the whole Miramichi
watershed produced only about , smolt (young salmon
descending to the sea). is was less than a third of the runs of the three preceding years.
Against such a background, the future of the salmon fisheries
in New Brunswick may well depend on finding a substitute for
drenching forests with DDT.
e eastern Canadian situation is not unique, except perhaps
in the extent of forest spraying and the wealth of facts that have
been collected. Maine, too, has its forests of spruce and balsam,
and its problem of controlling forest insects. Maine, too, has its
salmon runsa remnant of the magnificent runs of former days,
but a remnant hard won by the work of biologists and
conservationists to save some habitat for salmon in streams
burdened with industrial pollution and choked with logs.
Although spraying has been tried as a weapon against the
ubiquitous budworm, the areas affected have been relatively small
and have not, as yet, included important spawning streams for
salmon. But what happened to stream fish in an area observed by
the Maine Department of Inland Fisheries and Game is perhaps a
portent of things to come.
Immediately after the  spraying, the Department
reported, moribund suckers were observed in large numbers in
Big Goddard Brook. ese fish exhibited the typical symptoms of
DDT poisoning; they swam erratically, gasped at the surface, and
exhibited tremors and spasms. In the first five days after spraying,
dead suckers were collected from two blocking nets.
Minnows and suckers were also killed in large numbers in Little
Goddard, Carry, Alder, and Blake Brooks. Fish were often seen
floating passively downstream in a weakened and moribund
condition. In several instances, blind and dying trout were found
floating passively downstream more than a week after spraying.
(e fact that DDT may cause blindness in fish is confirmed
by various studies. A Canadian biologist who observed spraying
on northern Vancouver Island in  reported that cutthroat
trout fingerlings could be picked out of the streams by hand, for
the fish were moving sluggishly and made no attempt to escape.
On examination, they were found to have an opaque white film
covering the eye, indicating that vision had been impaired or
destroyed. Laboratory studies by the Canadian Department of
Fisheries showed that almost all fish [Coho salmon] not actually
killed by exposure to low concentrations of DDT [ parts per
million] showed symptoms of blindness, with marked opacity of
the lens.)
Wherever there are great forests, modern methods of insect
control threaten the fishes inhabiting the streams in the shelter of
the trees. One of the best-known examples of fish destruction in
the United States took place in , as a result of spraying in and
near Yellowstone National Park. By the fall of that year, so many
dead fish had been found in the Yellowstone River that sportsmen
and Montana fish-and-game administrators became alarmed.
About  miles of the river were affected. In one -yard length
of shoreline,  dead fish were counted, including brown trout,
whitefish, and suckers. Stream insects, the natural food of trout,
had disappeared.
Forest Service officials declared they had acted on advice that
pound of DDT to the acre was safe. But the results of the
spraying should have been enough to convince anyone that the
advice had been far from sound. A cooperative study was begun
in  by the Montana Fish and Game Department and two
federal agencies, the Fish and Wildlife Service and the Forest
Service. Spraying in Montana that year covered , acres;
, acres were also treated in . e biologists therefore
had no trouble finding areas for their study.
Always, the pattern of death assumed a characteristic shape:
the smell of DDT over the forests, an oil film on the water surface,
dead trout along the shoreline. All fish analyzed, whether taken
alive or dead, had stored DDT in their tissues. As in eastern
Canada, one of the most serious effects of spraying was the severe
reduction of food organisms. On many study areas aquatic insects
and other stream-bottom fauna were reduced to a tenth of their
normal populations. Once destroyed, populations of these
insects, so essential to the survival of trout, take a long time to
rebuild. Even by the end of the second summer after spraying,
only meager quantities of aquatic insects had re-established
themselves, and on one streamformerly rich in bottom fauna
scarcely any could be found. In this particular stream, game fish
had been reduced by  per cent.
e fish do not necessarily die immediately. In fact, delayed
mortality may be more extensive than the immediate kill and, as
the Montana biologists discovered, it may go unreported because
it occurs after the fishing season. Many deaths occurred in the
study streams among autumn spawning fish, including brown
trout, brook trout, and whitefish. is is not surprising, because
in time of physiological stress the organism, be it fish or man,
draws on stored fat for energy. is exposes it to the full lethal
effect of the DDT stored in the tissues.
It was therefore more than clear that spraying at the rate of a
pound of DDT to the acre posed a serious threat to the fishes in
forest streams. Moreover, control of the budworm had not been
achieved and many areas were scheduled for respraying. e
Montana Fish and Game Department registered strong
opposition to further spraying, saying it was not willing to
compromise the sport fishery resource for programs of
questionable necessity and doubtful success. e Department
declared, however, that it would continue to cooperate with the
Forest Service in determining ways to minimize adverse effects.
But can such cooperation actually succeed in saving the fish?
An experience in British Columbia speaks volumes on this point.
ere an outbreak of the black-headed budworm had been raging
for several years. Forestry officials, fearing that another seasons
defoliation might result in severe loss of trees, decided to carry
out control operations in . ere were many consultations
with the Game Department, whose officials were con cerned
about the salmon runs. e Forest Biology Division agreed to
modify the spraying program in every possible way short of
destroying its effectiveness, in order to reduce risks to the fish.
Despite these precautions, and despite the fact that a sincere
effort was apparently made, in at least four major streams almost
per cent of the salmon were killed.
In one of the rivers, the young of a run of , adult Coho
salmon were almost completely annihilated. So were the young
stages of several thousand steelhead trout and other species of
trout. e Coho salmon has a three-year life cycle and the runs
are composed almost entirely of fish of a single age group. Like
other species of salmon, the Coho has a strong homing instinct,
returning to its natal stream. ere will be no repopulation from
other streams. is means, then, that every third year the run of
salmon into this river will be almost nonexistent, until such time
as careful management, by artificial propagation or other means,
has been able to rebuild this commercially important run.
ere are ways to solve this problemto preserve the forests
and to save the fishes, too. To assume that we must resign
ourselves to turning our waterways into rivers of death is to follow
the counsel of despair and defeatism. We must make wider use of
alternative methods that are now known, and we must devote our
ingenuity and resources to developing others. ere are cases on
record where natural parasitism has kept the budworm under
control more effectively than spraying. Such natural control
needs to be utilized to the fullest extent. ere are possibilities of
using less toxic sprays or, better still, of introducing
microorganisms that will cause disease among the budworms
without affecting the whole web of forest life. We shall see later
what some of these alternative methods are and what they
promise. Meanwhile, it is important to realize that chemical
spraying of forest insects is neither the only way nor the best way.
e pesticide threat to fishes may be divided into three parts.
One, as we have seen, relates to the fishes of running streams in
northern forests and to the single problem of forest spraying. It is
confined almost entirely to the effects of DDT. Another is vast,
sprawling, and diffuse, for it concerns the many different kinds of
fishesbass, sunfish, crappies, suckers, and othersthat inhabit
many kinds of waters, still or flowing, in many parts of the
country. It also concerns almost the whole gamut of insecticides
now in agricultural use, although a few principal offenders like
endrin, toxaphene, dieldrin, and heptachlor can easily be picked
out. Still another problem must now be considered largely in
terms of what we may logically suppose will happen in the future,
because the studies that will disclose the facts are only beginning
to be made. is has to do with the fishes of salt marshes, bays,
and estuaries.
It was inevitable that serious destruction of fishes would
follow the widespread use of the new organic pesticides. Fishes
are almost fantastically sensitive to the chlorinated hydrocarbons
that make up the bulk of modern insecticides. And when millions
of tons of poisonous chemicals are applied to the surface of the
land, it is inevitable that some of them will find their way into the
ceaseless cycle of waters moving between land and sea.
Reports of fish kills, some of disastrous proportions, have now
become so common that the United States Public Health Service
has set up an office to collect such reports from the states as an
index of water pollution.
is is a problem that concerns a great many people. Some
million Americans look to fishing as a major source of recreation
and another  million are at least casual anglers. ese people
spend three billion dollars annually for licenses, tackle, boats,
camping equipment, gasoline, and lodgings. Anything that
deprives them of their sport will also reach out and affect a large
number of economic interests. e commercial fisheries
represent such an interest, and even more importantly, an essen
tial source of food. Inland and coastal fisheries (excluding the
offshore catch) yield an estimated three billion pounds a year. Yet,
as we shall see, the invasion of streams, ponds, rivers, and bays by
pesticides is now a threat to both recreational and commercial
fishing.
Examples of the destruction of fish by agricultural crop
sprayings and dustings are everywhere to be found. In California,
for example, the loss of some , game fish, mostly bluegill and
other sunfish, followed an attempt to control the rice-leaf miner
with dieldrin. In Louisiana  or more instances of heavy fish
mortality occurred in one year alone () because of the use of
endrin in the sugarcane fields. In Pennsylvania fish have been
killed in numbers by endrin, used in orchards to combat mice.
e use of chlordane for grasshopper control on the high western
plains has been followed by the death of many stream fish.
Probably no other agricultural program has been carried out
on so large a scale as the dusting and spraying of millions of acres
of land in southern United States to control the fire ant.
Heptachlor, the chemical chiefly used, is only slightly less toxic to
fish than DDT. Dieldrin, another fire ant poison, has a well-
documented history of extreme hazard to all aquatic life. Only
endrin and toxaphene represent a greater danger to fish.
All areas within the fire ant control area, whether treated with
heptachlor or dieldrin, reported disastrous effects on aquatic life.
A few excerpts will give the flavor of the reports from biologists
who studied the damage: From Texas, Heavy loss of aquatic life
despite efforts to protect canals, Dead fish  were present in all
treated water, Fish kill was heavy and continued for over
weeks. From Alabama, Most adult fish were killed [in Wilcox
County] within a few days after treatment, e fish in
temporary waters and small tributary streams appeared to have
been completely eradicated.
In Louisiana, farmers complained of loss in farm ponds. Along
one canal more than  dead fish were seen floating or lying on
the bank on a stretch of less than a quarter of a mile. In another
parish  dead sunfish could be found for every  that remained
alive. Five other species appeared to have been wiped out
completely.
In Florida, fish from ponds in a treated area were found to
contain residues of heptachlor and a derived chemical, heptachlor
epoxide. Included among these fish were sunfish and bass, which
of course are favorites of anglers and commonly find their way to
the dinner table. Yet the chemicals they contained are among
those the Food and Drug Administration considers too dangerous
for human consumption, even in minute quantities.
So extensive were the reported kills of fish, frogs, and other
life of the waters that the American Society of Ichthyologists and
Herpetologists, a venerable scientific organization devoted to the
study of fishes, reptiles, and amphibians, passed a resolution in
calling on the Department of Agriculture and the associated
state agencies to cease aerial distribution of heptachlor, dieldrin,
and equivalent poisonsbefore irreparable harm is done. e
Society called attention to the great variety of species of fish and
other forms of life inhabiting the southeastern part of the United
States, including species that occur nowhere else in the world.
Many of these animals, the Society warned, occupy only small
areas and therefore might readily be completely exterminated.
Fishes of the southern states have also suffered heavily from
insecticides used against cotton insects. e summer of  was
a season of disaster in the cotton-growing country of northern
Alabama. Before that year, only limited use had been made of
organic insecticides for the control of the boll weevil. But in
there were many weevils because of a series of mild winters, and
so an estimated  to  per cent of the farmers, on the urging of
the county agents, turned to the use of in secticides. e chemical
most popular with the farmers was toxaphene, one of the most
destructive to fishes.
Rains were frequent and heavy that summer. ey washed the
chemicals into the streams, and as this happened the farmers
applied more. An average acre of cotton that year received
pounds of toxaphene. Some farmers used as much as  pounds
per acre; one, in an extraordinary excess of zeal, applied more
than a quarter of a ton to the acre.
e results could easily have been foreseen. What happened
in Flint Creek, flowing through  miles of Alabama cotton
country before emptying into Wheeler Reservoir, was typical of
the region. On August , torrents of rain descended on the Flint
Creek watershed. In trickles, in rivulets, and finally in floods the
water poured off the land into the streams. e water level rose
six inches in Flint Creek. By the next morning it was obvious that
a great deal more than rain had been carried into the stream. Fish
swam about in aimless circles near the surface. Sometimes one
would throw itself out of the water onto the bank. ey could
easily be caught; one farmer picked up several and took them to a
spring-fed pool. ere, in the pure water, these few recovered. But
in the stream dead fish floated down all day. is was but the
prelude to more, for each rain washed more of the insecticide into
the river, killing more fish. e rain of August  resulted in such
a heavy fish kill throughout the river that few remained to become
victims of the next surge of poison into the stream, which
occurred on August . But evidence of the deadly presence of the
chemicals was obtained by placing test goldfish in cages in the
river; they were dead within a day.
e doomed fish of Flint Creek included large numbers of
white crappies, a favorite among anglers. Dead bass and sunfish
were also found, occurring abundantly in Wheeler Reservoir, into
which the creek flows. All the rough-fish population of these
waters was destroyed alsothe carp, buffalo, drum, gizzard shad,
and catfish. None showed signs of diseaseonly the erratic
movements of the dying and a strange deep wine color of the gills.
In the warm enclosed waters of farm ponds, conditions are
very likely to be lethal for fish when insecticides are applied in the
vicinity. As many examples show, the poison is carried in by rains
and runoff from surrounding lands. Sometimes the ponds receive
not only contaminated runoff but also a direct dose as crop-
dusting pilots neglect to shut off the duster in passing over a pond.
Even without such complications, normal agricultural use
subjects fish to far heavier concentrations of chemicals than
would be required to kill them. In other words, a marked
reduction in the poundages used would hardly alter the lethal
situation, for applications of over . pound per acre to the pond
itself are generally considered hazardous. And the poison, once
introduced, is hard to get rid of. One pond that had been treated
with DDT to remove unwanted shiners remained so poisonous
through repeated drainings and flushings that it killed  per cent
of the sunfish with which it was later stocked. Apparently the
chemical remained in the mud of the pond bottom.
Conditions are evidently no better now than when the
modern insecticides first came into use. e Oklahoma Wildlife
Conservation Department stated in  that reports of fish
losses in farm ponds and small lakes had been coming in at the
rate of at least one a week, and that such reports were increasing.
e conditions usually responsible for these losses in Oklahoma
were those made familiar by repetition over the years: the
application of insecticides to crops, a heavy rain, and poison
washed into the ponds.
In some parts of the world the cultivation of fish in ponds
provides an indispensable source of food. In such places the use
of insecticides without regard for the effects on fish creates
immediate problems. In Rhodesia, for example, the young of an
important food fish, the Kafue bream, are killed by exposure to
only . parts per million of DDT in shallow pools. Even smaller
doses of many other insecticides would be lethal. e shallow
waters in which these fish live are favorable mosquito-breeding
places. e problem of controlling mosquitoes and at the same
time conserving a fish important in the Central African diet has
obviously not been solved satisfactorily.
Milkfish farming in the Philippines, China, Vietnam,
ailand, Indonesia, and India faces a similar problem. e
milkfish is cultivated in shallow ponds along the coasts of these
countries. Schools of young suddenly appear in the coastal waters
(from no one knows where) and are scooped up and placed in
impoundments, where they complete their growth. So important
is this fish as a source of animal protein for the rice-eating
millions of Southeast Asia and India that the Pacific Science
Congress has recommended an international effort to search for
the now unknown spawning grounds, in order to develop the
farming of these fish on a massive scale. Yet spraying has been
permitted to cause heavy losses in existing impoundments. In the
Philippines aerial spraying for mosquito control has cost pond
owners dearly. In one such pond containing , milkfish,
more than half the fish died after a spray plane had passed over,
in spite of desperate efforts by the owner to dilute the poison by
flooding the pond.
One of the most spectacular fish kills of recent years occurred
in the Colorado River below Austin, Texas, in . Shortly after
daylight on Sunday morning, January , dead fish appeared in
the new Town Lake in Austin and in the river for a distance of
about  miles below the lake. None had been seen the day before.
On Monday there were reports of dead fish  miles downstream.
By this time it was clear that a wave of some poisonous substance
was moving down in the river water. By January , fish were
being killed  miles downstream near La Grange, and a week
later the chemicals were doing their lethal work  miles below
Austin. During the last week of January the locks on the
Intracoastal Waterway were closed to exclude the toxic waters
from Matagorda Bay and divert them into the Gulf of Mexico.
Meanwhile, investigators in Austin noticed an odor
associated with the insecticides chlordane and toxaphene. It was
especially strong in the discharge from one of the storm sewers.
is sewer had in the past been associated with trouble from
industrial wastes, and when officers of the Texas Game and Fish
Commission followed it back from the lake, they noticed an odor
like that of benzene hexachloride at all openings as far back as a
feeder line from a chemical plant. Among the major products of
this plant were DDT, benzene hexachloride, chlordane, and
toxaphene, as well as smaller quantities of other insecticides. e
manager of the plant admitted that quantities of powdered
insecticide had been washed into the storm sewer recently and,
more significantly, he acknowledged that such disposal of
insecticide spillage and residues had been common practice for
the past  years.
On searching further, the fishery officers found other plants
where rains or ordinary clean-up waters would carry insecticides
into the sewer. e fact that provided the final link in the chain,
however, was the discovery that a few days before the water in
lake and river became lethal to fish the entire storm-sewer system
had been flushed out with several million gallons of water under
high pressure to clear it of debris. is flushing had undoubtedly
released insecticides lodged in the accumulation of gravel, sand,
and rubble and carried them into the lake and thence to the river,
where chemical tests later established their presence.
As the lethal mass drifted down the Colorado it carried death
before it. For  miles downstream from the lake the kill of fish
must have been almost complete, for when seines were used later
in an effort to discover whether any fish had escaped they came
up empty. Dead fish of  species were observed, totaling about
pounds to a mile of riverbank. ere were channel cats, the
chief game fish of the river. ere were blue and flathead catfish, bullheads, four species of sunfish, shiners, dace, stone rollers,
largemouth bass, carp, mullet, suckers. ere were eels, gar, carp,
river carpsuckers, gizzard shad, and buffalo. Among them were
some of the patriarchs of the river, fish that by their size must
have been of great agemany flathead catfish weighing over
pounds, some of  pounds reportedly picked up by local
residents along the river, and a giant blue catfish officially
recorded as weighing  pounds.
e Game and Fish Commission predicted that even without
further pollution the pattern of the fish population of the river
would be altered for years. Some speciesthose existing at the
limits of their natural rangemight never be able to re-establish
themselves, and the others could do so only with the aid of
extensive stocking operations by the state.
is much of the Austin fish disaster is known, but there was
almost certainly a sequel. e toxic river water was still possessed
of its death-dealing power after passing more than  miles
downstream. It was regarded as too dangerous to be admitted to
the waters of Matagorda Bay, with its oyster beds and shrimp
fisheries, and so the whole toxic outflow was diverted to the
waters of the open Gulf. What were its effects there? And what of
the outflow of scores of other rivers, carrying contaminants
perhaps equally lethal?
At present our answers to these questions are for the most
part only conjectures, but there is growing concern about the role
of pesticide pollution in estuaries, salt marshes, bays, and other
coastal waters. Not only do these areas receive the contaminated
discharge of rivers but all too commonly they are sprayed directly
in efforts to control mosquitoes or other insects.
Nowhere has the effect of pesticides on the life of salt marshes,
estuaries, and all quiet inlets from the sea been more graphically
demonstrated than on the eastern coast of Florida, in the Indian
River country. ere, in the spring of , some  acres of
salt marsh in St. Lucie County were treated with dieldrin in an
attempt to eliminate the larvae of the sandfly. e concentration
used was one pound of active ingredient to the acre. e effect on
the life of the waters was catastrophic. Scientists from the
Entomology Research Center of the State Board of Health
surveyed the carnage after the spraying and reported that the fish
kill was substantially complete. Everywhere dead fishes littered
the shores. From the air sharks could be seen moving in, attracted
by the helpless and dying fishes in the water. No species was
spared. Among the dead were mullets, snook, mojarras,
gambusia.
e minimum immediate over-all kill throughout the
marshes, exclusive of the Indian River shoreline, was - tons
of fishes, or about ,, fishes, of at least  species [reported
R. W. Harrington, Jr., and W. L. Bidlingmayer of the survey team].
Mollusks seemed to be unharmed by dieldrin. Crustaceans
were virtually exterminated throughout the area. e entire
aquatic crab population was apparently destroyed and the fiddler
crabs, all but annihilated, survived temporarily only in patches of
marsh evidently missed by the pellets.
e larger game and food fishes succumbed most rapidly
Crabs set upon and destroyed the moribund fishes, but the next
day were dead themselves. Snails continued to devour fish
carcasses. After two weeks, no trace remained of the litter of dead
fishes.
e same melancholy picture was painted by the late Dr.
Herbert R. Mills from his observations in Tampa Bay on the
opposite coast of Florida, where the National Audubon Society
operates a sanctuary for seabirds in the area including Whiskey
Stump Key. e sanctuary ironically became a poor refuge after
the local health authorities undertook a campaign to wipe out the
salt-marsh mosquitoes. Again fishes and crabs were the principal
victims. e fiddler crab, that small and picturesque crustacean
whose hordes move over mud flats or sand flats like grazing cattle,
has no defense against the sprayers. After successive sprayings
during the summer and fall months (some areas were sprayed as
many as  times), the state of the fiddler crabs was summed up
by Dr. Mills: A progressive scarcity of fiddlers had by this time
become apparent. Where there should have been in the
neighborhood of , fiddlers under the tide and weather
conditions of the day [October ] there were not over  which
could be seen anywhere on the beach, and these were all dead or
sick, quivering, twitching, stumbling, scarcely able to crawl;
although in neighboring unsprayed areas fiddlers were plentiful.
e place of the fiddler crab in the ecology of the world it
inhabits is a necessary one, not easily filled. It is an important
source of food for many animals. Coastal raccoons feed on them.
So do marsh-inhabiting birds like the clapper rail, shorebirds, and
even visiting seabirds. In one New Jersey salt marsh sprayed with
DDT, the normal population of laughing gulls was decreased by
per cent for several weeks, presumably because the birds could
not find sufficient food after the spraying. e marsh fiddlers are
important in other ways as well, being useful scavengers and
aerating the mud of the marshes by their extensive burrowings.
ey also furnish quantities of bait for fishermen.
e fiddler crab is not the only creature of tidal marsh and
estuary to be threatened by pesticides; others of more obvious
importance to man are endangered. e famous blue crab of the
Chesapeake Bay and other Atlantic Coast areas is an example.
ese crabs are so highly susceptible to insecticides that every
spraying of creeks, ditches, and ponds in tidal marshes kills most
of the crabs living there. Not only do the local crabs die, but others
moving into a sprayed area from the sea succumb to the lingering
poison. And sometimes poisoning may be in direct, as in the
marshes near Indian River, where scavenger crabs attacked the
dying fishes, but soon themselves succumbed to the poison. Less
is known about the hazard to the lobster. However, it belongs to
the same group of arthropods as the blue crab, has essentially the
same physiology, and would presumably suffer the same effects.
is would be true also of the stone crab and other crustaceans
which have direct economic importance as human food.
e inshore watersthe bays, the sounds, the river estuaries,
the tidal marshesform an ecological unit of the utmost
importance. ey are linked so intimately and indispensably with
the lives of many fishes, mollusks, and crustaceans that were they
no longer habitable these seafoods would disappear from our
tables.
Even among fishes that range widely in coastal waters, many
depend upon protected inshore areas to serve as nursery and
feeding grounds for their young. Baby tarpon are abundant in all
that labyrinth of mangrove-lined streams and canals bordering
the lower third of the western coast of Florida. On the Atlantic
Coast the sea trout, croaker, spot, and drum spawn on sandy
shoals off the inlets between the islands or banks that lie like a
protective chain off much of the coast south of New York. e
young fish hatch and are carried through the inlets by the tides.
In the bays and soundsCurrituck, Pamlico, Bogue, and many
othersthey find abundant food and grow rapidly. Without these
nursery areas of warm, protected, food-rich waters the
populations of these and many other species could not be
maintained. Yet we are allowing pesticides to enter them via the
rivers and by direct spraying over bordering marshlands. And the
early stages of these fishes, even more than the adults, are
especially susceptible to direct chemical poisoning.
Shrimp, too, depend on inshore feeding grounds for their
young. One abundant and widely ranging species supports the
entire commercial fishery of the southern Atlantic and Gulf
states. Although spawning occurs at sea, the young come into the
estuaries and bays when a few weeks old to undergo successive
molts and changes of form. ere they remain from May or June
until fall, feeding on the bottom detritus. In the entire period of
their inshore life, the welfare of the shrimp populations and of the
industry they support depends upon favorable conditions in the
estuaries.
Do pesticides represent a threat to the shrimp fisheries and
to the supply for the markets? e answer may be contained in
recent laboratory experiments carried out by the Bureau of
Commercial Fisheries. e insecticide tolerance of young
commercial shrimp just past larval life was found to be
exceedingly lowmeasured in parts per billion instead of the
more commonly used standard of parts per million. For example,
half the shrimp in one experiment were killed by dieldrin at a
concentration of only  parts per billion. Other chemicals were
even more toxic. Endrin, always one of the most deadly of the
pesticides, killed half the shrimp at a concentration of only half of
one part per billion.
e threat to oysters and clams is multiple. Again, the young
stages are most vulnerable. ese shellfish inhabit the bottoms of
bays and sounds and tidal rivers from New England to Texas and
sheltered areas of the Pacific Coast. Although sedentary in adult
life, they discharge their spawn into the sea, where the young are free-living for a period of several weeks. On a summer day a fine-meshed tow net drawn behind a boat will collect, along with the
other drifting plant and animal life that make up the plankton, the
infinitely small, fragile-as-glass larvae of oysters and clams. No
larger than grains of dust, these transparent larvae swim about in
the surface waters, feeding on the microscopic plant life of the
plankton. If the crop of minute sea vegetation fails, the young
shellfish will starve. Yet pesticides may well destroy substantial
quantities of plankton. Some of the herbicides in common use on
lawns, cultivated fields, and roadsides and even in coastal marshes
are extraordinarily toxic to the plant plankton which the larval
mollusks use as foodsome at only a few parts per billion.
e delicate larvae themselves are killed by very small
quantities of many of the common insecticides. Even exposures
to less than lethal quantities may in the end cause death of the
larvae, for inevitably the growth rate is retarded. is prolongs the
period the larvae must spend in the hazardous world of the
plankton and so decreases the chance they will live to adulthood.
For adult mollusks there is apparently less danger of direct
poisoning, at least by some of the pesticides. is is not
necessarily reassuring, however. Oysters and clams may
concentrate these poisons in their digestive organs and other
tissues. Both types of shellfish are normally eaten whole and
sometimes raw. Dr. Philip Butler of the Bureau of Commercial
Fisheries has pointed out an ominous parallel in that we may find
ourselves in the same situation as the robins. e robins, he
reminds us, did not die as a direct result of the spraying of DDT.
ey died because they had eaten earthworms that had already
concentrated the pesticides in their tissues.
Although the sudden death of thousands of fish or
crustaceans in some stream or pond as the direct and visible effect
of insect control is dramatic and alarming, these unseen and as
yet largely unknown and unmeasurable effects of pesticides
reaching estuaries indirectly in streams and rivers may in the end
be more disastrous. e whole situation is beset with questions
for which there are at present no satisfactory answers. We know
that pesticides contained in runoff from farms and forests are now
being carried to the sea in the waters of many and perhaps all of
the major rivers. But we do not know the identity of all the
chemicals or their total quantity, and we do not presently have
any dependable tests for identifying them in highly diluted state
once they have reached the sea. Although we know that the
chemicals have almost certainly undergone change during the
long period of transit, we do not know whether the altered
chemical is more toxic than the original or less. Another almost
unexplored area is the question of interactions between
chemicals, a question that becomes especially urgent when they
enter the marine environment where so many different minerals
are subjected to mixing and transport. All of these questions
urgently require the precise answers that only extensive research
can provide, yet funds for such purposes are pitifully small.
e fisheries of fresh and salt water are a resource of great
importance, involving the interests and the welfare of a very large
number of people. at they are now seriously threatened by the
chemicals entering our waters can no longer be doubted. If we
would divert to constructive research even a small fraction of the
money spent each year on the development of ever more toxic
sprays, we could find ways to use less dangerous materials and to
keep poisons out of our waterways. When will the public become
sufficiently aware of the facts to demand such action?
